HARARE – Cassava Smartech Zimbabwe’s EcoCash business says it is excited by the overwhelming response of customers to its “My EcoCash Rewards” loyalty promotion, saying to date close to a million customers have already hit their targets and redeemed their points for value. The loyalty programme guarantees rewards to customers for sending money, paying merchants, paying bills, buying airtime and data bundles, receiving remittances via Cassava Remit and EcoCash Remit and for using banking services such as Bank2Wallet and Swipe into EcoCash services. EcoCash’s chief executive Natalie Jabangwe said it was heart-warming to see hundreds of thousands of EcoCash subscribers rewarded for simply using services that are vital for their day-to-day living. “The response has been unbelievable this early on for a promotion running into 2021. We are excited that our customers have expressed their appreciation of the loyalty promotion programme, and for that we are truly grateful,” she said. “As you know, anyone who transacts and hits their target can get something back from the points they accrue. We are excited that close to a million customers have already redeemed their points as cash back into their EcoCash wallet, or as airtime,” Jabangwe said, adding that this was over and above the fact that participating customers still stood a chance to win several other great prizes. The loyalty programme, which is running until February next year, will see EcoCash customers standing a chance to win several prizes, including television sets, grocery hampers, goats, cows and cash. “I am glad that we are continuing to put smiles on many people’s faces all across Zimbabwe with this promotion during these difficult times. We have a lot of things in the pipeline aimed at uplifting our customers’ spirits as we approach the festive season,” Jabangwe said. Customers can dial *151*300# to check their points. “The more you transact, the more points you accrue,” she said, adding since inception nearly a decade ago, EcoCash had always sought innovative ways to create customer convenience and enhance people’s lives. “EcoCash has grown from a service that simply enables customers to send and receive money, to a fully-fledged, integrated mobile fintech platform, offering several value propositions to millions of Zimbabweans every day,” Jabangwe said. “This growth has come at the back of relentless innovation from our staff and partners, enabling us to develop and offer relevant customer ‘use cases’ time and again. This promotion is therefore our small way of thanking and rewarding our customers for their loyal support throughout all the years.” The award-winning EcoCash mobile money platform, which was upgraded into a modern, robust and more secure fintech platform, offering even more features less than a year ago, was established in 2011, and has grown into Zimbabwe’s most preferred mobile payments platform. Several businesses in Zimbabwe — from large retailers to small-scale traders and farmers — use EcoCash to make and receive payments as well as to settle their bills, with nearly 90% of Zimbabwe’s adult population regularly using mobile money to make financial payments. It is not only urban-based EcoCash customers being celebrated, but also those in rural and often marginalised remote areas of the country, where the mobile money platform brings the formal financial services to many previously unbanked citizens of the country, along with the associated impact on their economic well-being and welfare.