BY FREEMAN MAKOPA MULTI-AWARD-WINNING gospel musician Janet Manyowa continues to strike the right chord since she ventured into the music industry, making a mark both on the local and international scenes. Manyowa has won several awards and has become a household name after fans fell in love with the way she packaged her music, from instrumentals to lyrical content. Her unique voice has won the hearts of many music lovers in the country and beyond the borders. Recently, her hit song Ndimi was nominated in the Best of Africa Category alongside David Dayo of Nigeria, Thabile Myeni of Swaziland and Heal Africa Children Choir at South Africa’s Sabc Crown Gospel Music Awards (CGMA). Speaking through her husband-cum-manager Munyaradzi Manyowa, the singer said there were over the moon for being recognised on the continent, adding that diligence and hard work paid. “I am so grateful for this special honour. It is encouraging to know that we have been recognised in the whole continent of Africa. The hard work is paying off. It propels me to keep working hard and pushing the boundaries. I give glory to the Lord for using me at such a time as this,” she said. “I will say be diligent, consistent and hardworking. Give your best with what you have and where you are. There is a place and audience for you in the market, be true to yourself and your sound.” Manyowa said she was grateful for the nomination and recognition, emphasising that winning it would be a great recognition for Zimbabwean music at large. The singer has also hinted on the release of an album. “We are looking to release an album soon. When we start releasing singles, it is leading to an album, so watch the space,” she said. Manyowa recently scooped best collaboration award (southern Africa) at the Maranatha Worship Awards for the duet Mbiri, which features Tembalami. She is currently riding high on her latest offering Makafanira which premiered on October 9 this year and stands at 117 623 YouTube views. The CGMA awards were first launched in 2008 as an initiative to celebrate and reward excellence within the gospel music industry in South Africa and beyond. They are run in partnership with South Africa’s public broadcaster SABC and have always been broadcast live on SABC channels.