Blockchain technology is a robust technology that has something extra to give its users. If you want to compare Blockchain technology with something, then the closest resemblance would be the internet of the 1990s. However, the design of Blockchain technology has been done after a considerate thinking process. This technology holds the key to change the way we interact, function, and live.Blockchain technology was created originally for the sake of supporting Cryptocurrencies. However, over time, people could find usage in several industries. Since then, most of the industries have adopted Blockchain technology to boost their performance in many ways. The major aspect of Blockchain technology is that all the information encoded in the Blockchain cannot be copied. It can only be distributed among the members of the Blockchain network.As of now, Blockchain technology is being used by industries to verify digital transactions. And the work is in the process of finding other possible regulations of this technology. The popularity of digital currencies is proof that Blockchain has been performing in the market. After seeing such outstanding results in the finance industries, experts believe that Blockchain technology can be used to transform more industries with a little bit of tuning.Blockchain technology is a decentralized network, which means there are no authorities who have control over it. This feature of Blockchain technology is what makes this technology prone to fraudulent activity.Interestingly, in recent years, we have seen lots of start-ups that centre around Blockchain technology.Here are some of the industries that have benefitted the most. Blockchain is known for its tamper-proof ledger technology. This technology has grabbed the attention of people for its accuracy and efficient information-sharing network. This network can offer its services to billions of people. Including those people who have no access to the traditional banking structure. With the possibility of a Blockchain network, banking sectors are investing in this secure technology to boost their security. The real estate industry always had a bad reputation for transparency. Due to the lack of transparency in the real estate agency, fraudulent activities are common. But with Blockchain technology, you can keep paperless documentation and speed up the whole transaction process. Real estate Blockchain applications help you record, track property deeds and ensure that all the documents are accurate and verifiable. It has always been an issue to look after the supply chain management. We had tried every possible technology to make this process more efficient. However, everything was for naught. With the integration of Blockchain technology, every financial transaction can be well-documented and monitored. One of the advantages of using the Blockchain is that it provides a secure network for transparent transactions. With the integration of Blockchain technology in the system, you will reduce potential time delays and human errors. Blockchain is a unique entity that can verify the trade status and thoroughly track the products from their origin.  We all know the rules and regulations that universities follow to be accepted on the international platforms. However, despite the progress we have made with the technologies, we are left with the manual verification of the academic credentials. However, if we can integrate the Blockchain technologies into the system, we will streamline the verification of the academic credentials. After adapting to the Blockchain technology, education sectors will be able to see through unearned claims and will be able to obstruct any fraudulent activities. The health care sector is one of the sectors that have always been in favor of Blockchain technology. It is always a hassle to carry all your medical documentation every time you visit your doctor. In some cases, most of the documents are lost, causing a delay in the medication. However, with Blockchain technology, all the medical data and reports can be stored inside the blockchain. This way, you do not have to worry about carrying all the documents. Blockchain technology can help patients store all of their past medication documentation in one place, making it easier for doctors to overview their current condition. There are other industries as well that are being affected by Blockchain technology. Here we have enumerated only the most dominant industry. However, the fashion industry is also becoming one of the most blockchain-influenced industries. Click the link to know https://www.fazemag.de. 