UNITED States President Donald Trump has taken to microblogging site Twitter demanding that vote counting be stopped. BY MOSES MATENGA “Stop the count,”Trump said in a terse statement. Earlier, Trump had threatened legal action.
“All of the recent Biden claimed States will be legally challenged by us for Voter Fraud and State Election Fraud. Plenty of proof – just check out the Media. WE WILL WIN! America First,” he said moments later in a tweet that was, however, hidden as it allegedly contained disputed information that might be misleading about the election. “Any vote that came in after election day will not be counted,” Trump also said and the statement was later hidden. But in apparent response to Trump, Biden also took to social media where he wrote : “Every vote must be counted.” “Donald Trump does not decide the outcome of this election and nor do I. The American people decide. That’s why we’ve launched the Biden Fight Fund — to ensure every vote is counted,” Biden said. Biden said he was confident of victory.
Results, as predicted by experts including Dr Meena Bose, are likely to take long due to effects of Covid-19 that will see a number of mail votes among other issues. In a presentation to journalists covering the US elections virtually under the Foreign Press Centres: Elections 2020 Virtual Reporting Tour, Bose, executive Dean, public policy and public service programs at the Peter S. Kalikow Center for the Study of the American Presidency, said results of the elections may be affected by absentee versus in-person voting, safety measures for voting and more time for mail vote counting.
According to the timeline of the electoral process he gave in his presentation, November 3 is the Election Day with the process expected to end January 6 with the Electoral college votes being announced in Congress by Senate President. January 20, 2021 is set as the Inauguration Day where the winner and his running mate are sworn in as president and vice president respectively in Washington. National polls give a firm lead to Biden, but it is a closer race in the states that could decide the outcome.
On Wednesday,Trump said during a press conference that the election was fraud” and he would contest in the courts.