THE driver of the Honda Fit that was involved in a head-on collision with the late socialite Genius “Ginimbi” Kadungure’s Rolls-Royce Wraith II has said he is yet to accept that he was alive. BY KENNEDY NYAVAYA In an interview with NewsDay Life & Style yesterday, Lucky Chikwanda who is recuperating from injuries on his right hand, leg and waist, said he was failing to understand how he survived the horrific crash. “I still cannot believe that I am alive, but God is amazing, He saved me. After seeing the damage done to the cars, I am still failing to convince myself that I am not a ghost,” he said. “I was on my way from Hatcliffe when it (accident) took place and he (Ginimbi) was coming from the city centre direction trying to overtake two cars in front of him, but he failed to do it and by the time he tried to return to his lane, it was too late.” Chikwanda said when he saw that the speeding Ginimbi had encroached onto his lane, he just screamed and prayed that he would survive. “He (Ginimbi) was speeding and when I saw his car right in front of me,  all I did was to scream. On impact, my car was forced to spin and face the direction we were coming from, while Ginimbi’s car went on to hit a tree about 20 to 30 meters away from the point of impact,” he said. Chikwanda said on the fateful day, he was in company of a friend, Artwell Kamisara, who sustained minor injuries. He said he wished he could attend Ginimbi’s funeral and burial. “I am still traumatised and I wish I could attend the funeral, but I am in so much pain. Even when I was told at the scene that it was Ginimbi and his friends who had not survived, I was hurt, because I knew about him,” he said. As the matter is still being investigated by the police, Chikwanda said he would not comment much about rumours or conspiracy theories being peddled, but maintained that his hands were clean. “Despite keeping my distance from social media in the past days, I have heard those conspiracy theories, but I am just an ordinary person who did not know it was Ginimbi,” he said. “I knew him as he has a leisure spot close to where I stay and I sometimes go there to have fun with friends, so it is a painful experience for me.”  Follow Kennedy on Twitter:
@ken_nyavaya