FORMER Warriors captain Danny “Deco” Phiri believes the senior men’s football team can get a positive result against Algeria in their Africa Cup of Nations qualifier tomorrow night. BY FORTUNE MBELE Phiri said that most of the players who were selected for the squad that left last night were doing well for their various clubs and could carry that form into the national team. The Warriors are away to the Desert Foxes in a Group H qualifier at the Stade du 5 Juillet before hosting them four days later at the National Sports Stadium. Phiri said that if coach Zdvrako Logarusic could get it right on the combinations and if the players could fully focus and believe in themselves they could secure a win in Algeria. “We have a good squad and given enough time we can even do better. All the boys in the squad are doing well for their respective clubs in the different leagues that they play in. We can win if get the right combinations. If we work together I think we will do well,” Phiri said. However, the former Warriors’ skipper said Algeria would not be a stroll in the park. “But it is going to be a tough match against Algeria. It’s not a small task playing Algeria but we can hold our on. We must have confidence and believe in ourselves. I think our team will do well. I have confidence in the guys doing well,” he said. He said a draw would be a good result for Zimbabwe against the African champions. “If we can hold them in Algeria we can always come back and bank on home advantage to win. We have our chances and I’m positive we will emerge with a good result,” he said. The last time the Warriors played Algeria was in Gabon at the 2017 Afcon finals in a Group B match that ended 2-2, with Kuda Mahachi and Nyasha Mushekwi on target for Zimbabwe. Phiri was at the 2017 Afcon finals. Algeria lead Group H after beating Botswana and Zambia last November. Zimbabwe is on position two after playing a draw with Botswana and beating Zambia. The top two teams qualify for the finals in Cameroon.