BY MOSES MUGUGUNYEKI Medical practitioners in private practice operating under the auspices of the Medical and Dental Private Practitioners of Zimbabwe Association (MDPPZA) will at the end of the month converge in Kadoma for the inaugural conference. MDPPZA is an inclusive national body of medical practitioners in private practice. The three-day conference is running under the theme Restoring the Health Profession to its Glory Through Moulding Balanced and Ethical Practitioners. According to the association’s interim secretary-general Cletos Masiya, the conference will bring together medical practitioners in private practice for the first time to chart the way forward for the one-year old association. The association, the first of its kind in the country, registered in July last year, has lately been on a massive mobilisation drive reaching out to nurses, medical doctors, dental therapists, dentists and laboratory scientists, among others. “We shall be having our inaugural conference for MDPPZA from November 27 to 29, 2020 in Kadoma,” Masiya said. “A lot of considerations and consultations were done through the representative interim national executive.” More than 200 medical health practitioners drawn from across the country are expected to attend the conference. “Basically, we will push a lot for bread and butter issues for the members with a line-up of exciting sessions covering many subjects including financial, practitional welfare, legal environment, managed healthcare, real estate and CSR [corporate social responsibility],” Masiya said. “There will be a few good hard-hitting relevant academic sessions. Entertainment will be in place as well. “We have enquiries from various companies wanting to exhibit as well.” MDPPZA interim president Johannes Marisa said the conference would bring to the fore issues to do with the amelioration of the welfare of all practitioners registered in private practice regardless of one’s area of speciality. “This conference is meant to look at the welfare of medical practitioners, especially in the area of health financing,” he said. Marisa said a number of stakeholders, including medical aid societies and service providers, would grace the conference. Masiya said MDPPZA was meant to help medical practitioners engage, collaborate and strengthen their resolve in bringing about economic prosperity and collective negotiations as an association. MDPPZA made headlines recently when they took care of the late comedian Lazarus “Gringo” Boora as part of the association’s corporate social responsibility.