BY PRAISEMORE SITHOLE CONSUMERS yesterday expressed disquiet over the recent 50% electricity tariff hike by Zesa at a time workers’ salaries were failing to match the cost of living. The Zimbabwe Electricity Transmission and Distribution Company (ZETDC) increased electricity tariffs with effect from Sunday. “This is in accordance with the tariff award of October 2, 2019, which approved the implementation of monthly tariff indexation formula for changes above 10%,” read the ZETDC statement. They said the first 50kWh will cost $1,67, then 51 to 200kWh will cost $3,65, and 201 to 300kWh will cost $9,92. On September 23, ZETDC increased electricity tariffs by 50%, then by another 50% on October 1, followed by the recent increase of 50%. Bulawayo United Residents Association chairperson Winos Dube said life was getting tougher on a daily basis for an ordinary Zimbabwean. “This scenario of Zesa tariffs increases is another blow below the belt which is going to affect a lot of people who are already struggling,” Dube said. “This now calls for intervention from the government to put measures that will cushion people,” he said. Dube said it was better to dollarise as it was the only way to improve the lives of ordinary people. Kadoma Progressive Residents Association secretary-general George Goliati said residents were unhappy with the tariff increases. “They have increased  Zesa tariffs, yet the salaries of the majority of the people in Zimbabwe have not been increased. This shows that the money we are getting is useless because everything is increasing 100% and we cannot afford anything,” he said. Goliati said the majority of the residents were suffering due to such increases in prices. “We are saying since ZETDC is government-owned, they should consider that many people in Zimbabwe are earning very little. Many of the families are surviving on one meal a day,” he said. Ibhesthu Lika Zulu secretary-general Mbuso Fuzwayo said: “The idea is to make citizens not to use electricity of which the majority will resort to cutting trees, especially those on the outskirts of towns which will lead to deforestation. Electricity is now for the rich, the poor will use firewood for cooking and candles,” Fuzwayo said.
lFollow Praisemore on Twitter
@TPraisemore