Zimbabwe’s late former leader Robert Mugabe stepped down on November 21, 2017, bringing an end to nearly 40 years of iron-fisted rule. His resignation came days after military tanks rolled through the capital Harare. The coup was greeted with euphoria with tens of thousands of people pouring into the streets to celebrate. But three years after his successor Emmerson Mnangagwa took over, the high hopes for change have dissipated into disaffection. What has changed after Mugabe? “Nothing has changed. Things have only got worse,” said Ibbo Mandaza, head of the Harare-based Southern African Political and Economic Series. “Look at the levels of poverty. Look at the repression. Things are much worse.” Is the economy any better? On assuming power, Mnangagwa pledged to fix the country’s moribund economy, which had taken a battering under Mugabe’s watch. But the economic woes — including the foreign currency crunch that plagued Mugabe’s rule — remain and the promise of new jobs is still a pipe dream for many. While some goods that were once either scarce or inaccessible are now readily available, most of the population cannot afford basic necessities. The UN World Food Programme, which has traditionally provided aid to the poor in rural areas, has expanded its reach to urban dwellers. The World Bank predicts the economy will contract by 10% this year, while the government says it will shrink 4,5% because of macro-economic and COVID-19 shocks. Mnangagwa has blamed the economic struggles on unnamed enemies. The ruling Zanu PF party claimed last Friday that at least 500 000 formal jobs had been created under Mnangagwa. What about human rights?
Mnangagwa’s government has targeted opposition figures, rights activists, and lawyers in what is seen as a tactic to strike fear into a restive population. Human rights monitoring group Zimbabwe Peace Project said since November 2017, it has documented 7 962 cases of abuse, including abductions of about 100 activists and opposition figures by suspected State agents or pro-government supporters. Rights abuses “are worse and more gruesome”, prominent human rights activist Jestina Mukoko said. In 2018, six people were gunned down when soldiers deployed to quell protests over delayed election results. Five months later 17 others were killed after the military was sent out to quell demonstrations over a fuel price hike. Award-winning journalist Hopewell Chin’ono has been detained twice this year. Is anything new politically? University of Zimbabwe political scientist Eldred Masunungure said the current picture “points to a comprehensively volatile situation”. “Nothing points to stability but I don’t want to overstate this because we have reached this crossroads many times before and the country has not collapsed. The default position in the country is one of instability. It appears like the new normal. “It’s an exceptional case where the regime survives despite the volatility, where citizens don’t rise up despite the simmering anger. The regime staggers but does not fall. That’s the mystery of our situation.” What are people saying?
On the streets of Harare, resident Timothy Bhaureni said: “Things cannot continue this way. These people should just admit they have failed.” — Al Jazeera