UNITED Kingdom-based building materials supplier, Vaka Building Materials and Hardware has gone into partnership with Rawson Properties that will see Vaka selling the property giant’s products in the diaspora. “We have gone into partnership with Rawson properties. We will sell the Rawson products to Zimbabweans in the diaspora. We will be their agent in the United Kingdom,United States of America and South Africa,” said the company’s chief executive officer, Tapiwa Kundoro. Vaka was recently adjudged the best Online Building Materials Supplier 2020 at the African excellence awards done by Middle East Africa (MEA) market. Rawson Properties is a property company specializing in Property Sales, Rentals, Valuations, and Marketing and Selling of property development projects in the medium to low density suburbs of Zimbabwe. “One of the leading, oldest and international real estate firm Rawson Properties has made a giant move in partnering with one of the leading UK based online building supplier, Vaka Hardware. Our Partnership with Vaka started a few weeks ago, but we have experienced overwhelming responses, and our valued clients are so excited and delighted with the convenience and efficiency that comes by dealing with the two firms. We had clients in the diaspora who have been struggling to find  trustworthy partners to help them buy or rent out Properties, but our partnership with  VAKA Zimbabwe has proved to be the solution,” said Rawson Marketing Manager Norah Jena. “Both companies have 3 things in common, they are innovative and aggressive in marketing, they are serving the property sector and they both serve local and diasporians Zimbabweans who has keen interest in investing in the Zimbabwean real estate market. A lot of diasporians  view investing in real estate back home as the most significant achievement, so the one stop shop solution provides for Rawson to provide vacant stands from their individual clients or from property development projects, which are sold on favorable terms, and Vaka comes in with a whole range of building material solutions under one roof.” The partnership is set to help clients buy and build their properties under one roof, without the hassle of moving from one supplier to another supplier and puts an end to cheating by some untrustworthy relatives of diasporas who have lost their hard-earned foreign currency. Vaka Building Materials and Hardware are the online building materials supplier in Zimbabwe. Vaka is an official agent of more than 40 building materials supplier based in Zimbabwe that include Zimtile, Willdale Bricks, Impipower, Metrotile, Duraworld, Sorwell Steel, Lafarge and many more. It provides building materials to Zimbabweans in the diaspora and at home. Customers can buy building materials from the comfort of their homes from anywhere in the world. Vaka is a one stop building partner and has transformed how people buy building materials in Zimbabwe. With back offices in South Africa, United Kingdom and USA and branches in Harare, Gweru and Bulawayo and a distribution network that supplies all over Zimbabwe, Vaka has helped many Zimbabweans in the diaspora to build homes back in Zimbabwe. The company also offers services like solar systems, chase contractors, house plans, property management, car hire, groceries, plumbing and vaka fuel.