THE ailing popular actor and comedian Lazarus “Gringo” Boora  is alive and recuperating at Westview Medical Centre in Ruwa contrary to rumours of his death which circulated over the weekend. BY WINSTONE ANTONIO Social media was yesterday awash with claims that the veteran entertainer had breathed his last. The Medical and Dental Private Practitioners of Zimbabwe Association (MDPPZA), which has donated its services and medication to rescue the famed entertainer, dispelled the rumours in a statement, adding that Gringo was in a stable condition. “It has come to our attention that some people are spreading incorrect information that Lazarus Boora has passed on. This is not true. Lazarus is alive and is still in hospital,” read the statement. In a follow-up interview with NewsDay Life & Style, MDPPZA president Johannes Marisa described social media rumour mongers as “satanists”. “This is so sad, where has our ubuntu/hunhu gone? I am at the hospital and Gringo just had his breakfast now after going through his morning X-rays,” he said. “This must not be tolerated at all, how can someone wish someone dead? People should not spread lies. It is really bad.” “I can assure you that our friend Gringo, Lazarus Boora is on his way to full recovery, courtesy of the medical practitioners who chipped in and provided the drugs and all the necessary tests that he required,” he said. “Mr Boora’s condition is very much pleasing as we speak. We are hopeful that in three or so days he will be discharged. Let’s continue praying, we are out of trouble now and I am quite optimistic that things are going to continue in this rightful path.” “We want to thank those who have contributed in prayer, finances, drugs, laboratory services such as Interpath Ultimate Diagnostic Solutions and Diagnopath Medical Laboratories that have offered free tests to Gringo, done courtesy of our members who are also laboratory scientists,” he said. A film writer, director and producer, who is close to Gringo, Leonard Chibamu also dismissed the death hoax. “Thank you all for standing by our beloved brother Gringo in his trying times. He is in hospital and stable. I want to dispel all rumours in circulation on his death as falsehoods,” he said. “Thank you all for the support and prayers. We wish him speedy recovery.” Gringo’s death hoax came shortly after Olivia and Charles Charamba were last week rumoured to have died in a road accident. In an interview with NewsDay Life & Style last week, music critic Fred Zindi said peddlers of such “dry jokes” should be sued as the news tended to affect a lot of souls. “Although death hoaxes about celebrities are not a new phenomenon, perpetrators of such ‘jokes’ should be sued as the news upsets a lot of souls,” he said. The Charambas joined a long list of other musicians among them dancehall chanter Winky D, Leonard “Karikoga” Zhakata, Jah Prayzah and Soul Jah Love who have also suffered the same fate.