UNITED Kingdom-based building materials supplier, Vaka Building Materials and Hardware was adjudged the best Online Building Materials Supplier 2020 at the African excellence awards done by Middle East Africa (MEA) market. MEA Markets is a quarterly publication dedicated to researching and publicising the major moves and events as they happen across the entire Middle East & Africa region, one of the world’s most powerful, innovative and influential business regions, and home to countless leading firms across numerous fast-moving industries. It has a  team of highly trained and committed journalists, contributors, researchers and worldwide industry insiders are on hand to ensure that  global readership enjoys 24/7 access to timely and entertaining  content that keeps them up to date with the ins and outs of this fast moving region. Vaka Building Materials CEO Tapiwa Kundoro said the award was a recognition of the company’s hard work through the support it offers to Zimbabweans at home and abroad. “ I am happy to announce that we have gone live on the MEA Markets website with this year’s winners of the African Excellence Awards 2020.We are proud to receive this award, it’s a recognition for the hard work we continue to put in the brand and a  credit to the Vaka Team for the work we do to support many Zimbabweans both at home and in the diaspora as they continue to build,” Kundoro said. Vaka Building Materials and Hardware are the online building materials supplier in Zimbabwe. Vaka is an official agent of more than 40 building materials supplier based in Zimbabwe that include Zimtile, Willdale Bricks, Impipower, Metrotile, Duraworld, Sorwell Steel Lafarge and many more. Vaka provides building materials to Zimbabweans in the diaspora and at home. Customers can buy building materials from the comfort of their homes from anywhere in the world. Vaka is a one stop building partner and has transformed how people buy building materials in Zimbabwe  With back offices in South Africa, United Kingdom and USA and branches in Harare, Gweru and Bulawayo and a distribution network that supplies all over Zimbabwe, Vaka has helped many Zimbabweans in the diaspora to build homes back in Zimbabwe. 