THE Zimbabwe national cricket team has started preparing  for their proposed home series against Afghanistan either next month or August. BY Kevin Mapasure Players started fitness drills in Harare,  Bulawayo, Kwekwe,  Mutare and Kadoma on Monday.
A squad of 37 players is in place and conducted training sessions at various places in order to avoid large gatherings. All players have been tested for the coronavirus and results were all negative, Zimbabwe Cricket (ZC) has said. “After all the players as well as the coaching staff got the all-clear, training officially started on Monday,” ZC said in a statement yesterday.  “Due to national lockdown restrictions and also to ensure social distancing is strictly observed, the training squad is split into small zonal groups that are practising within their own provinces. Bulawayo-based players got the ball rolling on Monday with a fitness test that was overseen by provincial coach Njabulo Ncube at Queens Sports Club. On the same day, national fielding coach Shepherd Makunura took Tendai Chisoro through his paces at Masvingo Sports Club. Harare has the largest number of players who have been split into two groups, with 14 of them training at Harare Sports Club and 11 at Takashinga Cricket Club under the guidance of fitness trainer Walter Karimanzira, batting coach Stuart Matsikenyeri and bowling coach Douglas Hondo. The Takashinga-based players held their fitness test yesterday morning, with the Harare Sports Club group following suit in the afternoon. The squad sees the return of Ryan Burl to national contention after he was snubbed for the Bangladesh tour earlier this year.  After the Afghanistan series, Zimbabwe’s next assignment is a tour to Australia. Zimbabwe training squad – zonal practice: Bulawayo: Brian Chari, Christopher Mpofu, Ainsley Ndlovu, Charlton Tshuma, Sean Williams
Harare (Harare Sports Club): Faraz Akram, Ryan Burl, Sikandar Raza Butt, Chamunorwa Chibhabha, Elton Chigumbura, Craig Ervine, Kyle Jarvis, Tinashe Kamunhukamwe, Neville Madziva, William Mashinge, Peter Joseph Moor, Brian Mudzinganyama, Ryan Murray, Brendan Taylor
Harare (Takashinga Cricket Club): Regis Chakabva, Luke Jongwe,
Wessly Madhevere, Timycen Maruma, Wellington Masakadza, Prince Masvaure, Tapiwa Mufudza, Tinotenda Mutombodzi, Richmond Mutumbami, Richard Ngarava, Victor Nyauchi
Midlands (Kadoma): Brandon Mavuta
Midlands (Kwekwe): Carl Mumba
Masvingo: Tendai Chisoro
Manicaland: Tendai Chatara, Kevin Kasuza, Donald Tiripano