AWARD-WINNING gospel musician Janet Manyowa yesterday said her forthcoming single, Tariro, was meant to offer hope to people going through challenges. BY FREEMAN MAKOPA Manyowa said although the idea of the song came to her a long time ago, its theme was timely given the COVID-19 pandemic that has affected the entire globe. “The main message is about hope – not losing hope despite the challenges we may face. The song is a affirmation and reminder that the Lord will never leave nor forsake us,” she said. “I wrote this song years ago and it was based on Isaiah 43. It then came to memory as we were in the COVID-19 season.” The musician said it was important for people to look up to God during times of crisis. “I was reflecting on how God is the only hope and how we should solely depend on him at all times. It uplifted me and I believe it will uplift someone else,” she said. On whether her fans should expect a new album this year, Manyowa could not commit, except saying she was currently focusing on singles. ”From Ndimi earlier in the year and the upcoming release of Tariro, I have been releasing singles at the moment. But maybe, just maybe I will release a body of work before the year ends,” she said.
Manyowa said although she had won awards, her aim was to use music as an instrument of spreading the word of God. “The main aim has always been to spread the good news of Jesus Christ and to be ambassadors of the Gospel in the best way possible,” she said. “I am grateful for all the recognition that has came along the way with the awards. It’s God’s grace.” Following her collaboration with Tembalami, Manyowa said she was looking forward to more local and international collaborations. “Certainly I will collaborate more in the near future both locally and internationally. I believe there is always value when two or more people come together on any project,” she said. Manyowa, whose music career is managed by husband Munyaradzi Manyowa, said their ability to separate family from business had worked wonders. “The key is accommodating each other and separating business from family issues, ie manager from husband in my case. We try as much possible to make all decisions together and convince each other were there is need. I am grateful that I have him as my pillar of support – together we achieve more,” she said.