ZIMBABWE international soccer icon Knowledge Musona’s hopes to stay in Europe have been boosted further with reports suggesting AS Eupen prefer him over Bosnia-Herzegovina forward Smail Prevljak who had emerged as his main competition for a place in the Pro League side’s squad. BY TAWANDA TAFIRENYIKA Prevljak, who had been playing with Musona at AS Eupen before the lockdown, is also on loan from Austria Bundesliga giants — Red Bull Salzburg. While AS Eupen would have wanted to have both attackers in the forthcoming season, financial considerations appear to be weighing heavily against the Bosnia-Herzegovina international who is reported to be an expensive option for the club with a current market value of €2m, while Musona is valued at €800 000. According to Belgian media outlet Grenzecho — to have both players- is a plan that is difficult to implement from a financial perspective and believes the chances for Musona’s success for AS Eupen are greater than for Prevljack. “Knowledge Musona or Smail Prevljak: AS Eupen would like to have both attackers on the bend in the coming season. A plan that is difficult to implement from a financial perspective alone. It currently looks as if AS Eupen’s tendency is more towards Knowledge Musona. “Although the attacker from Zimbabwe is still under contract with RSC Anderlecht until 2022, the chances of success for AS Eupen are greater than for Smail Prevljak. The RB Salzburg striker (contract until 2022) was more accurate, but is correspondingly expensive,” the report concluded. The 29-year-old Zimbabwean international had a nightmarish spell at Anderlecht, making only eight appearances and scoring one goal after joining in July 2018. His failure to hold down a first team shirt culminated in a loan switch to AS Eupen in the January transfer window. However, Musona flourished at AS Eupen — scoring two goals in six starts — before the sporting world was halted as a result of the coronavirus pandemic. Now according to reports in Belgium, AS Eupen’s Spanish coach Benat San Jose hopes to convince him to stay beyond his loan deal as they seek to take him on board in a permanent deal. “Benat San José hopes for the return of Smail Prevljak and Knowledge Musona to AS Eupen,” reported Belgian publication Lameuse Sport. Warriors’ coach Zdravko Logarusic has previously praised Musona for his resilience and predicted that he would be a huge success if he signed for AS Eupen. The Croatian said he would build his team around players who are plying their trade in Europe including Musona whom he described as a big player for Zimbabwe. Other players playing for top teams in Europe who are in the national team include Marvellous Nakamba, Macauley Bonne, Tendai Darikwa (England), Teenage Hadebe (Turkey) and the duo of Tino Kadewere and Marshall Munetsi (France).