Serendipitously ten years ago, just few days after the first edition of NewsDay which was Friday 4 June 2010, I was in a friend’s car. My friend handed me a copy of NewsDay since he had two copies. You may remember the paper was 50 American cents. You could buy $1 for 2 or get a coupon to use the following day. As soon as I touched the paper, the Spirit of the Lord spoke to me in a still soft voice saying, “I want to speak through this paper.” When I got home at the end of the day, I read through the paper. Under divine inspiration, I prayed for a long period of time and went to bed. Like a deja vu, nder divine mandate and commission, the next day I went to number 1 Kwame Nkurumah the then offices of NewsDay. I saw the then editor, Norah Spi who courteously received me. After introducing myself, I simply told her that God wanted to use me as vessel to preach the Gospel of Christ through their publication. She told me that she was going to meet with her editorial team and respond to me thereafter.
At the appointed time, I went back. The good news was that they had agreed to give me space in the Saturday edition. I expressed my gratitude. As I walked out, I felt great fear or awe of the Lord who according to the words of the early apostles in Acts 5:41, ”And they departed from the presence of the council, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for his name.” I prayerfully endeavour to present the truth of the revelation of the Scriptures in my installments. I’m grateful to the whole family of Alpha Media; a conducive work ethics, culture and environment.
From the Chairman, Trevor Ncube to the person by the gate everyone is welcoming. They’re a team. You won’t see the boss subordinate culture. Everyone is important. NewsDay has taught me to be concise and succinct. My space allocation doesn’t allow me to beat by the bush. My preaching on the pulpit has taken the format of presenting the Grace of God simply, but hard hitting as God would want it to be. The frightening commission that the Lord gave me requires sincerity, research and much study. While God gives you an idea, He will certainly not study for you. I don’t want to publish error or heresy. If I make a mistake I can damage millions of God’s people. This piece isn’t a defense of my inclination for I report to God the Father of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Apostle Paul teaches in 2 Timothy 2:15, “Study to shew thyself approved unto God, a workman that needeth not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth.” The audience of this message is quite broad. Editor in chief said, “NewsDay is now distributed in every town and district across the country. Computer technology was a world away when the first edition of NewsDay rolled off the printing press, but today our digital platforms have the biggest audiences in the country due to our unique content.” I, therefore, submit every word, sentence, paragraph and indeed the whole piece with in a responsible way. My pieces have been adapted by many other publications and used by other preachers as resource material, a humbling reality. Chief executive officer weighs in, “This 10-year milestone, the statistics of the million eyeballs and reads become part of our history, our memories. In 10 years, readers mutate and grow and we have welcomed a newer set of readers too. This new follower is loyal to speed, and variety. We have had to embrace technology. During the COVID-19 period alone, we went digital and shared our paper with over 1 000 000 readers in Zimbabwe and the world. Though we are against content sharing, it was a pleasure to see competing sites stealing our content.” The Grace of God has seen His mission and assignment in NewsDay thus far. I remain committed and dedicated to God’s call upon my life. Thank you all for your valuable acceptance of Grace of God. His desire as recorded in 1 Timothy 2:4 is, “Who will have all men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge of the truth.” Salvation and truth to the born again believers are at the core of God’s heart.
When the Gospel of Christ is faithfully and truthfully presented, hearers/listeners and receivers will be able to stand. Acts 20:32 reads, “And now, brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them which are sanctified.” Now unto him that is able to keep you from falling, and to present you faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy, To the only wise God our Saviour, be glory and majesty, dominion and power, both now and ever. Amen. Grace and peace be multiplied to you through knowledge. Feedback: pastor@newgatechapel.org Fellowship with Pastor Makarimayi on Facebook and on www.twitter.com/PEMAKARIMAYI.