CONTEMPORARY musician Jah Prayzah was yesterday appointed the lifetime brand ambassador for West Property (WestProp) Zimbabwe, as it seeks to enhance its visibility on the market. BY FREEMAN MAKOPA Speaking at the unveiling ceremony in Harare, WestProp’s finance director Simbarashe Kadye said they had high hopes that the musician will help increase their brand visibility. “We want to thank Jah Prayzah and the Military Touch team for accepting to work with us and it is our hope that he will help us to increase our visibility on both the local and international markets,” he said. “This we are certain, will give us access to the markets and we also hope he will invest with us in future.” The Kutonga Kwaro hitmaker expressed satisfaction over the role given to him, and said he would continue to influence the growth of new artistes. “I am really excited to have been granted this role and it means a lot not just to me but also to the brand. We have always had the vision to follow a path to growth and we continue with that,” he said. “People always have the mentality that artistes join the entertainment sector not as a career, but now we are showing them that it is a career that can sustain one’s life and Jah continues to influence a lot of youths who are growing through this path. I want to thank WestProp for coming aboard in assisting people to build the future of their kids,” he said. WestProp sales and marketing manager Marily Mosha-Chihota disclosed that the artiste would tour some of their properties and choose one that he would use as part of his new role. “We will tour our properties with Jah Prayzah and he will choose the one that he desires and will reveal it because this is a long-term project and the deal will run forever and as much as he wants to work with us, we will remain together,” she said. The development comes soon after the musician became the first ever Zimbabwean artiste to reach 100 million hits on the online video-sharing platform, YouTube, courtesy of the popularity of his 109 music videos on the platform. WestProp was established in 2007 and is at the forefront of property development in Harare and plays multiple roles including being master planner, financier and developer of sustainable residential and commercial properties in the capital.