A SOLDIER stationed at Induna Barracks 11 Combat Group and a police officer stationed at Njube Police Station in Bulawayo last week appeared in court facing charges of assaulting a resident during the COVID-19 lockdown. BY SILAS NKALA Obvious Nkomo (33), a soldier and Dennis Maturi (45), a police officer, were denying the charge when they appeared before magistrate Jaconiah Ncube on Friday. They were remanded out of custody to July 9 for continuation of trial. The court was told that on May 1 this year at round 5pm near Sidudla Bar in Njube, Bulawayo along Luza Road, the pair was on duty escorting a truck selling subsidised mealie-meal and doing routine checks when they had a quarrel with a motorist Winston Chadomba (33), of Mpopoma. It is the State case that following the brawl, Maturi allegedly assaulted Chadomba with open hands and Nkomo joined in the assault, beating him with the butt of the gun and open hands. After the assault, the two handcuffed him together with two other people. The court heard that after some minutes, the two took Chadomba to Njube Police Station. Chadomba was held at the police station up to about 7pm and later released without charge.
The complainant went home experiencing pain in his right ear. On May 5,  Chadomba sought medical attention. He then engaged the Zimbabwe Lawyers for Human Rights to lodge a complaint against the police and the army. The court heard that a doctor confirmed that he suffered a damaged ear. The matter was then reported to the police, leading to the arrest of the two officers. Chadomba said he clashed with the pair after finding their truck blocking the way when he wanted to proceed to his home. He claimed that the police officer then switched off the engine of his car and removed the keys from the ignition before dragging him out of the car and assaulting him. The soldier joined in, assaulting him using the butt of the gun. “As a result, our client suffered serious injuries all over the body and his ears were affected such that he is currently having hearing impairment,” Chadomba’s lawyer said.