LEADERS are called to serve and not to behave like parasites that suck the blood of their hosts with little regard for the future. But it would appear that our politicians have, in the recent past, become parasitic, neglecting the call of service and concentrating more on the feeding trough. By KK, Our Reader The call of office has now become an opportunity to jump onto the gravy train where they feed on the overburdened taxpayers who can ill-afford basic meals or mere access to healthcare services. Our leaders have been living in the lap of luxury without compunction, while they are surrounded by a sea of poverty in which the majority of citizens are drowning. While ordinary people are struggling daily to feed their families, raise money for school fees and pay hospital bills, those in power are demanding free access to top-of-the-range SUV vehicles, expensive hotel accommodation and comfortable air travel, even to meetings that do not add any value to the country’s fiscus. For a nation that is struggling to access foreign currency to buy medication, a nation failing to provide bread and now fleecing its citizens through a 2% electronic transfer tax for every transaction, MPs and any other elected public official should be ashamed of themselves if they are driven by the motive of self-enrichment. They should follow the footsteps of Gweru mayor Josiah Makombe who rejected a US$150 000 Mercedes Benz, which was going to be funded by the long-suffering ratepayers of the city. Makombe put the call to service ahead of his personal needs, where others would have justified that the vehicle was necessary for his office and dignified the city, he rightly saw it as a waste of resources and an insult to ratepayers. He becomes the second mayor after former Kwekwe mayor Matenda Madzoke, who refused to take delivery of a new car from a local authority struggling to collect refuse or deliver basic service to its ratepayers. Madzoke, instead, chose to cycle to work and walked out of office without claiming a golden handshake, saying he was more concerned with service delivery than self-enrichment. This is a culture that needs to be cultivated in our politics. The nation needs more selfless leaders who understand that positions of authority are not for self-aggrandisement, but they are tools, which if used correctly, will empower the community. Greed by our leaders has reached shocking proportions. They demand high allowances when they travel on business. They abuse tender procedures so that they can feed their pot bellies at the expense of the people they promised to serve. This greed has fuelled the shockingly high levels of corruption in this country. They loot public coffers with impunity and defend such profanity with a straight face. This should stop! We applaud those selfless leaders who have stood in the gap and said people come first, and that service is better than selfishness. Public officials in Zimbabwe appear to have increasingly grown a sense of entitlement where they feel, because of their positions, they must have free access to certain amenities and other luxuries. This has cascaded down even to the civil service where teachers, doctors and nurses, for instance, are now demanding to be paid in United States dollars rather than the readily available bond note. What has become of their sworn pledge to servant leadership? This creates the impression that when they decided to contest for political office, it was not so much about serving their communities, but deriving certain benefits courtesy of their new-found positions. This culture needs to be nipped in the bud. It would be ideal for these public office bearers to first deal with the problems facing citizens before they start thinking of some handsome rewards. There are instances, however, when certain interventions are required, like in the case of rural councillors who have to walk long distances on council business.