I AM a concerned citizen who is worried bout the corrupt collusion between Parliament, government and a faction of the opposition party, the Movement for Democratic Change (MDC-T) following a “moot“ Supreme Court judgment passed on March 31 which urged the warring factions of the MDC to organise an extraordinary congress to elect the successor of the late MDC leader Morgan Tsvangirai. By Kennedy Kaitano, Our Reader It should be put on record that following the death of Tsvangirai, Thokozani Khupe and MDC Alliance leader Nelson Chamisa registered for elections under two different parties. Khupe used the name MDC-T while Chamisa registered as MDC Alliance, a fact confirmed by Douglas Mwonzora in numerous interviews at the time of the registration for elections. Now because of the Supreme Court ruling, Khupe is recalling MDC Alliance MPs. If anything, Speaker of Parliament Jacob Mudenda, who is a lawyer, should have read the Supreme Court  judgment carefully and understood that the moot judgment, described as such by the court, only gave a time frame for which Khupe and Morgen Komichi should organise an extraordinary congress, failure which the parties which the court was encouraging to unite would revert to their post-Tsvangirai statuses. What then would happen if the warring parties do not get back together as suggested by the Supreme Court? The Supreme Court judgment never mandated Khupe to fire officials of the party in place at the time of Tsvangrai’s death, but mandated her to unite them and if she successfully does so, organise the extraordinary congress with them. Interestingly, despite contravening the Supreme Court judgment and the party constitution, Khupe and her team are getting support from government, with the Justice minister Ziyambi Ziyambi stating that the government would disburse the $7,5 million due to the MDC Alliance under the Political Parties (Finance) Act to the Khupe-led group that is temporarily in charge of the party following the recent court rulings. As leader of government in Parliament, Ziyambi should know better that the MDC-T and MDC Alliance are registered as different political parties, hence none of them should enjoy the other’s benefits. Government and Parliament should stop supporting a faction of the warring MDC. They are in contempt of the Supreme Court judgment.