SOUTH Africa-based Zimbabwean hip-hop sensation King 98 has dangled $18 000 to his fans in a campaign to market his debut album, Francesca, through a promotion that will run until June 29. BY WINSTONE ANTONIO The 22-year-old King 98 signalled his arrival on the showbiz scene in style as he launched the 14-track album (named after his mother) last year at a high-profile event that was graced by regional artistes, Davido from Nigeria and Nasty C from South Africa at Wingate Golf Club in Harare. The grand prize of the competition is $10 000 plus a meeting with King 98 and his executive team while the second prize is $5 000 plus a meeting with the singer’s executive team with the third prize being $3 000. In an interview with NewsDay Life & Style, King 98 said the lucky
fans should be his followers on different social media platforms. “Those who wish to participate in the competition should choose any song from my album Francesca which is available on YouTube and make a drama act or cover song or dance out of it. All acts must be in a two to three-minute video,” he said. “After recording the two to three-minute act, it must be uploaded on the fan’s social media handles namely Facebook, Instagram and YouTube with Twitter being an added advantage. You can tag me on my social media accounts @King98Official(facebook and instagram), @Official_King98 (twitter) and OfficialKing98 (YouTube). Also tag @realstephendavid, @simmz_chaggy on all the social media pages.”
The singer said before uploading the video, the fans must hashtag him at #King98 and also hashtag #FrancescaAlbum, adding that the video with the most views, likes, comments and shares will have an advantage. While the COVID-19-induced national lockdown has disrupted not only showbiz activities and artistes’ capacity to generate income through live shows, King 98 showed his philanthropic side, parting with funds he had set aside for his video to show love to those who support him. King 98 has collaborated with a number of continental heavy weights with the aim to revolutionise local hip-hop music and take his brand and music beyond borders. Apart from collaborations, King 98 has been on a regional tour that has seen him taking his music to Zambia, Mozambique, South Africa and Nigeria. King 98 has recorded a number of duets with the likes of South African hip-hop sensation Nasty C, LayLizzy of Mozambique and Nigerian superstar Davido, who he says is his music mentor, and Zlatan Ibile. The rapper’s music is receiving airplay on both radio and television channels such as Channel O, MTV Base and Trace Africa. In the midst of the COVID-19, King 98 said he had not laid back, but was busy in the studio as he continues to add more songs to his growing catalogue.