SOUTH Africa-based Zimbabwean singer Philani “Phitso” Mhlanga has shelved plans to release his forthcoming album, Chigondora, which was scheduled for the market this month and resorted to single releases in the wake of the coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak. BY WINSTONE ANTONIO The Legacy band frontman launched his latest single titled Manyanya on SABC radio (Livhu) on Sunday and it is now available on YouTube, Reverberation, Spotify and ITunes. The musician, inspired by the late Oliver Mtukudzi and Tongai Moyo, told NewsDay Life & Style that he decided to launch the single on SABC’s radio because he needed to market his music across the Limpopo. “We have decided to put on hold the release of the album Chigondora and concentrate on singles that will be timely in the midst of this global COVID-19 pandemic that has affected almost every sector of life, hence the release of our latest single titled Manyanya produced by Oscar Chamba of KOM studios in Harare,” he said. “As we hold on to the album, our fans are not going to be starved as we will be giving them more singles. Launching the song Manyanya live on SABC’s Livhu radio is part of our initiative to market our music here so that we capture a wider audience. We are also going to do the same live launch on one of our Zimbabwean radio stations when all the logistics are done as we are currently in the negotiation process. Through the track, Manyanya, that has political connotations, the singer challenges and encourages a father to be a responsible family man by providing for his family. Phitso said his forthcoming album was an important project as it was his first production after migrating from gospel to Afro-fusion. “When I was singing gospel, I had a certain group or part of society that this music targeted and that is those who are of the Christian faith. Therefore, in order for me to reach all facets of society, I have decided to rebrand to Afro-fusion music so as to encompass everyone regardless of religious beliefs,” he said. “This new genre (Afro-fusion) has challenges because people or fans try to put you in the shoes of legends in which one cannot easily fit. This forthcoming album is also important in the sense that it is going to change my life and behaviour as this type of music requires one to be well-disciplined and focused as some people link the type of music with the late legend Tuku’s music. The focus then is on making sure that the fans can get sense, inspiration and meaning from this new album.” A devout member of Zimbabwe Assemblies of God Africa Forward in Faith church, Phitso said he was happy with the positive response he was getting from listeners, describing it as “a big encouragement” in his musical career. Born in the Checheche area of Chipinge, Phitso released his debut gospel album titled NaJesu Tinosvika Chete in 2013. It was followed by Dream Again Zvinoita the following year, which had hit-songs such as MaZimbabwe, Ibva Muroad and Zvinoita.