AUSTRALIA-BASED Zimbabwean singer Cozzy “Kozile” Dube says the outbreak of the global COVID-19 pandemic could have temporarily dampened his spirit, but he picked himself up as he worked under lockdown to finalise his second eight-track album titled Zimbabwe Kumba. BY WINSTONE ANTONIO The former football star yesterday told NewsDay Life & Style from his base in Perth, Australia, that his vision is to bring people together through music. “My aspiration is to compose incredibly rich music laden with clean lyrics that can accommodate all age groups, the music that youths and those who are mature can sit and listen at one gathering,” he said. “I always love to be positive about the future and this is why I have picked up myself in this environment where the global pandemic has not only affected our creative industry by coming up with something new for the fans. Some of the message on the album that targets all age groups and races is also inspired by my Christian background.” The Kwekwe-bred musician said the album title Zimbabwe Kumba was inspired by the thoughts of being a Zimbabwean in the diaspora where the lifestyle is admirable, though the identity will never change. Kozile said he was happy that his music, which showcases the rich Zimbabwean culture, had been positively received in the multi-cultured nation. “People in my hood are multi-cultural. They understand the diverse cultures of the world, so this has seen my music being positively appreciated. This is something good to be appreciated in a foreign land,” he said. The singer’s manager, Oscar Nembire expressed gratitude to the fans who have been supporting Kozile’s music since the release of his first album Uchandifunga last year. “We make music for the people and we are grateful to have those fans who are our paymasters as they support our works. We are there because of them, so they are special to us and we thank them for their support,” he said. On the forthcoming album’s title track Zimbabwe Kumba, the singer talks about how beautiful Zimbabwe is and being homesick, while on Inzwaiwo Kuchema he is appealing for God’s divine intervention to answer prayers of a troubled soul. On Aya Mamero, Kozile talks about people with negative perceptions about someone’s success. Before the lockdown, Kozile had become a darling with a number of promoters jostling for his signature to perform at different top concerts such as the Jambo Festival.