BY FORTUNE MBELE SUDANESE giants Al Hilal have hit FC Platinum again after they robbed Zimbabwe’s representatives in the Caf Champions League of star forward Silas Songani. The latest development leaves FC Platinum coach Hendrikus Pieter De Jongh sweating over his team’s preperations for the continent’s premier club competition. Songani (31) will be joining his teammate Last Jesi, who is said to be signing a three-year contract with the Sudanese giants. Jesi was on a one-year loan with FC Platinum. FC Platinum spokesperson Chido Chizondo confirmed that Songani was on his way out of FC Platinum after playing just one competitive match for the club following his move from Denmark. “Songani is leaving any time this week. I suppose he will be signing with Al Hilal if  they agree personal terms, but he is not going there for trials,” Chizondo said. De Jongh yesterday said losing Songani will be a big loss for FC Platinum as the club prepares for the Caf Champions League set to start at the end of November. The Dutchman said he will definitely be looking for a replacement for Songani, who signed for FC Platinun at the beginning of the year. He only played one competitive game where he single-handedly demolished Highlanders in the Castle Challenge Cup in March before the league was suspended because of the COVID-19 pandemic. “Songani has special qualities. That is a loss. He may be our best player at the moment because of his European experience and his individual technical qualities. We are most likely going to look for a top replacement. The targets are already there, but I cannot reveal their names,” De Jongh. Songani had a blast of a season in 2013 while playing for Harare City and was named Soccer Stars of the Year runner-up before he was snatched by SønderjyskE of Denmark the following year and was loaned to FC Sydvest in 2016. In 2017, he was loaned to a Norwegian team Club Elverum before returning to FC Sydvest in 2018 on loan, a club he eventually signed for in January 2019 before returning home at the end of the year. On Jesi, who was on loan to FC Platinum from Manica Diamonds, De Jongh said: “Jesi is also a good player. Only that he was not selected for the Castle Challenge Cup where he displayed a great performance.”