IN-DEMAND Warriors centre back Teenage Hadebe is bidding his time to find the right club with the best offer and is prepared to spurn interest from the French Ligue 2 and stay on at Turkish topflight side Yeni Malatyaspor, NewsDay Sport has learnt. BY TAWANDA TAFIRENYIKA Hadebe has been strongly linked with a move to France or Turkish Super League giants Besiktas among a host of clubs said to be seeking his signature. His future has been a subject of speculation following an impressive debut campaign where he was named in the Team of the Season for that league despite his club struggling and only surviving relegation following a boardroom decision. Hadebe has recently been linked with French Ligue 2 side Amiens. French publication Courrier Picard reported last week that Hadebe had caught the eye of the Ligue 2 side Amiens, who are reportedly weighing him as an option to replace on-loan Liverpool defender Adam Lewis. However, while confirming that the player has attracted interest from several European clubs including Amiens, the player’s handlers said the player was happy at Yeni Malatyaspor and would only consider a switch if a bigger offer was tabled. “The issue with Hadebe is that he is very happy at Yeni Malatyaspor and is not looking to move for now unless a bigger and tempting offer comes his way. It’s true there are several inquiries from Europe and that includes Amiens but there has to be a convincing reason for him to move, there has to be a much better offer if he is to leave.  He is contracted to Yeni Malatyaspor, he is not a free agent, so it’s not like he can move just like that. At the moment he is enjoying his stay at Yeni Malatyspor,” the player’s manager Gibson Mahachi said yesterday. Hadebe made his first appearance of the season for his club after coming on as a substitute in the 81st minute as Yeni Malatyaspor picked their first point of the season following a one-all draw at home against Göztepe last Friday. He missed the team’s opening game of the new season, which they lost 3-0 against Fatih Karagümrük SK. His absence from Yeni Malatyaspor’s starting line-up despite being one of their outstanding players last season had sparked speculation that he could be on his way out.