There is no doubt that 2020 has turned out to be a year unlike any other as the Corona Virus swept the globe altering the way that many of us worked or source our entertainment. The hospitality industry suffered considerably alongside other industries as social distancing was implemented and establishments closed. Although Zimbabwe has a small casino network, that network was vibrant and has been sorely missed by many casino games lovers who can no longer visit establishments like the Regency, Montclair, Makasa Sun, or Harare Sun Casino Turning Online Today with the threat of Covid19 looming just about the corner many people who love to play casinos games have turned online to get their casino action and the internet has never been so important as it is today. Reports tell us that just like at the bricks and mortar casinos, slot games continue to be one of the most popular casino games amongst enthusiasts both at the land based venues and online which has led to some truly exciting games being developed. One of the most popular online slots is Book of Dead which can be found at fruityking.co.uk and if you do join the site you will be offered 20 free spins on the game as part of your welcome bonus. What Makes Book of Dead so Special? Book of Dead online slot is an immersive game which has 5 reels and 10 paylines with a classic Egyptian theme The Symbols Play ‘n Go creates great games and Book of Dead is no different. The symbols from the highest value down to the lowest are:- The scatter symbol takes the form of a Golden Book (the Book of Dead) You can choose your betting settings by hitting the grey button on the bottom of your game screen which allows you to set the number of coins you want to bet on each line which range from 1 coin to 5 coins, then you can set your coin value which starts at just 0.01 up to 100. Next you can set the number of lines you want to bet on (anything from 1 line up to all of the 10 paylines). There is an autoplay feature that can be taken advantage of by making Book of Dead one game which can really be personalised to you own tastes. The Special Features Although Book of Dead is not the only Egyptian slots game out there it stands out from the rest as the graphics are so colourful and sharp with an upbeat soundtrack to increase your enjoyment.