Cryptocurrency is expressively backed by reliability which has made it possible for the Cryptocurrency to gain huge momentum in global finance. Using Cryptocurrency for various purposes is very much a possible factor, but it is mostly used to the bitcoin storm website which is safe to use. But here we have brought in a different concept of earning bitcoins, as freelancers are famous all across the world and they get paid off quite well. The freelancers are betrayed by many clients who do not give loyalty on time. Hence this behavior of the clients has made it a compulsion for the freelancers to move into crypto payments. They avoid getting payment through traditional cash or bank transfer. Crypto payment has various advantages as it has helped some extremely. Here we bring down all the points for which you can shift from traditional payment to crypto payment. The concept of digital currency or bitcoins actually helps all employers or freelancers or anyone unemployed to save a lot of time. But you may note that there are costs implied for the conversion of the currency to a digital currency. The Crypto payment includes the charges for the transfer and conversion into digital currency but that is considerably lower than any other payment. In traditional payment, services like transfer and conversion are highly charged. While we use the traditional payment method, the processing speed varies, it depends on the amount of money. The processing is inversely related to the amount of money, the larger the amount of the money the slower is the conversion rate. The time required for the processing of a large amount is more because it needs to meet more permission regarding the transfer of the money. While using the Crypto payment makes the processing much faster as it depends on the processing system of the computer and the speed of the internet. In the case of online marketing, invoices play a major role, there has to be a bill for the client of the business, and the freelancers at the same time. With the growing number of platforms, that offer this type of invoice services making online marketing easier. While Crypto payment is much easier as it has been facilitated by the invoice services that are delivered to the sender and the receiver. This is a major problem faced by most of the freelancers in career are the run-away clients. They always come across some of the clients to take the assignment once it is done and then conveniently run away without paying for it. Some of the clients are clever enough to make delayed payment so by the time they get paid, they are the value of everything drops down in a manner that now there is no point in payment the amount which was discussed then. Switching on to the Crypto payments has made it convenient for the freelancers to get their payments then and there without any extra tantrums of the clients. Once you start doing it, you will see that trading using bitcoin is fun and interesting. In the similar way, it is not only easy but it also profitable for both parties. But this also brings in some of the market risks with its positivity, so you need to be ready and gladly accepting the risk along with the advantages of it. There are many software and robots that will help you to do the following and get the most out of it. It is believed that due to the convenience that the crypto payments provide a greater number of people will start using this.