Foreign exchange is the process of trading different currencies. Over time, it has emerged globally since it is volatile to anyone. However, for one to become a good and profitable trader beginner’s guide to Forex trading for free has been provided by major online trading broker ForexTime. Brokers have enabled trading to become much easier and online trading companies enable trade all across the globe including leading exchanges in Africa such as Nigeria Stock Exchange and Johannesburg Stock Exchange in South Africa. Forex trading can be profitable but it can also cause losses to traders if approached wrongly. Below are some guidelines that traders can follow when venturing into Forex trading. Forex trading has many features on the platform, one should take time to understand the market, know when to place orders, exit the market, execute orders leading one to make the best out of their investment. If done the right way one can make large profits from trading daily.If managed well Forex trade could be the source of finances. This is only achieved with a diligent eye on risk management, to minimize the losses that might occur during the trading process since the trade is volatile. Creating a trading plan is an important component of successful trading. This plan should involve one’s profit goals, risk tolerance level, methodology and evaluation criteria. Once that is set the trader should ensure that each trade falls within the plan parameters. The trading plan should be put to test in real market conditions with a risk-free practice which can be offered by Alpari. Here one will get a chance to see what it’s like to trade currency pairs while taking their trading plan for a test without risking any of the capital. It is important to choose the right partner as one engages in the exchanges. Pricing, execution, and quality of the customer service can make a great difference in the trading experience. Forex trading requires high-risk tolerance. When one’s finances are on the line, it is important to check on one’s limits. It includes knowing exactly how much one can spend and to risk on each trade, this can be achieved by setting leverage ratio in accordance with the needs and never risking more than he/she can afford to lose. Consistency is crucial but one should also consider re-evaluating the trading plan if things change or are not as much profit. As one’s experience grows the plan should also adjust especially when it comes to goals since the trader should be ready for growth. Looking for diversification opportunities thus increasing the chances of making profits. Making money can be exciting and one could do better by managing the risk and protecting potential profits depending on the stocks. This was achieved through halting on the limit orders, getting one out of the market price one set. Trailing stops are very helpful: this is done at a specific distance as the market moves to help in the protection of profits should the market reverse. Placing contingent orders does not guarantee a limit to risk losses. One should keep account of the fact that they have an open position and the markets don’t go their way. Instead, this could be accounted for with another trade or more that doesn’t fit with one’s trading plan. Well with Forex trading its different ‘revenge trading’ rarely goes well. One should stick to the plan and goals and instead focus on making more time to increase the finances. When traders follow these tips, they will have a chance to trade on foreign exchange more successfully. Proper management, financial discipline, and constant research being the heart of good Forex trading and success in Forex markets.