We already know that bitcoins or any other cryptocurrencies are very important for any sector. The tourism industry will run really well if the cryptocurrencies are used for tourism. The benefits of cryptocurrencies are innumerable as, as long as you know how to use them correctly. But enough of bitcoins and cryptocurrencies now, let’s check what the blockchain technology has saved for us. Let us now check the advantages of blockchain technology in the tourism industry. In recent times the blockchain technology has produced some significant interest in the different kinds of field, the fields which represent the financial sector and the business sector. The blockchain is majorly responsible for keeping the data saved and kept secret, it also helps to keep transparency in the transactions majorly, without incurring much loss in information. The combination of tours and travel along with blockchain can turn out to be very beneficial for all the people working in the tourism industry. The advantage is such because of the technology of blockchain, people can rely on blockchain to keep everything secret and safe for everyone who uses it. Any travel agency would require to make several bookings of flights and railways through various other platforms and companies but the blockchain process would make sure that they give extreme privacy to them. Such activities are made easy by the blockchain, they keep everything safe and transparent and this makes everything easy going between the clients and the agencies. A certain degree of trust is inculcated between all the parties that are involved in this. All the travel industries are related to various other organizations too when it comes to sharing of information. For example, the travel agents have to give the details of their clients while booking flights or hotel rooms, and the luggage of the clients have to be sent to several organizations for tracking while traveling. Here comes in the role of blockchain, it makes sure that accessing the stored information is easier but is available to only those who are entitled to the information.  Apart from this, the financial transaction history or the activity of transactions is very important for people who are related to this industry as well as the blockchain-related to it. The blockchain technology keeps it simple and also keeps it safe to be used and for keeping information.  Now if we talk about the uses, using the blockchain in the travel industry is very useful actually,  Conclusion Even after knowing so much about blockchain, the technology is still in its early phases. The potential of the bitcoins is still very debatable and it is very difficult to pinpoint and say where it would get into one’s destiny.  But the great thing is to know that the travel industry is now ready to get into bitcoins and blockchains.