SNEAK PEEK :Sharon Sibindi UPCOMING Bulawayo filmmaker Braydan Heart, popularly known as Kardashian, launched a reality show — Being Braydan — late last year which deals with issues of lifestyle, fashion, events and spaces around the City of Bulawayo, where he likes going with his socialite friends John Mombeshora, Linscah and Mitchelle Chikwengo as they navigate their way through different destinations. He said the show was a platform to showcase other youths in the entertainment industry. Strong-willed and focused, the 25-year-old Heart said most youths were trapped in drug abuse and vuzu parties because they felt there was nothing left that the city could offer them. NewsDay (ND) Life & Style reporter Sharon Sibindi caught up with Heart (BH) for an in-depth discussion. Below are excerpts from the interview. ND: Who is Braydan Heart? BH: I am a 25-year-old filmmaker from the City of Kings and I did my high school at Petra High. I got my degree in motion picture medium at AFDAI Film School in Cape Town, South Africa.
I am somewhat of a reserved person, but I tend to have an extraordinary perspective of the ordinary, which helps me a lot in producing my projects. It’s actually ironic how I am in front of the camera on this show, because I studied computer-generated imagery, editing and animation. I am hoping the quality of this production will also shed light to my film crew’s skills and my start-up post-production studio based in Bulawayo. ND: Can you briefly trace your journey thus far? BH: I entered showbiz the minute I decided to enrol into film school. Everything just started there. My main area of focus is post-production. (Although) I majored in computer-generated imagery in film school, I was allowed to also study other various disciplines such as directing, writing, acting and producing. ND: What have been the high points for you in the industry? BH: My most adventurous moment in the entertainment industry so far was deciding to take on the gig of a red carpet presenter as fashion police for the Bulawayo Arts Awards 2019. I had never done something like that before. I was never the public speaking kind of person, but on stage it felt like I had been doing it for years and it just felt like something I was born to do. ND: What is your fashion sense like? BH: When it comes to my wardrobe, anything goes for me, as long it catches my eye. For special events, I usually ask local designers to make something and for any other day of the week I wear off-the-rack stuff. I usually buy from retails. ND: Tell us about your reality show… BH: The simplest way I can explain the show is that it’s basically a very long Instagram story of my life and (that of my) friends. It basically shows the lifestyle, fashion, events and spaces around the City of Bulawayo that my friends and I like going to. The show is also a platform that showcases other youths in the entertainment industry doing incredible things around town. We had our official premiere at Ster-Kinekor Cinemas. We have already done several episodes and you can catch up with the show on YouTube. ND: And the scourge of drug abuse and vuzu parties in Bulawayo. What is your take on that? BH: I think most youths are trapped in issues of drug abuse and vuzu parties because they feel like there is nothing left this city can offer them. They actually need to realise that we are the first ever generation that is able to attend school or work during the day and be able to work on our dreams during the night. Instead of being on social media, fighting or whatever we young people do, what are we doing to empower ourselves? For example, with our reality show, we are using the same gadget we all use to go on social media, our phones, to film this whole show. We are actually using the same things everyone has access to. You don’t have to have a major studio or major equipment to chase your dreams, just because you don’t have a budget does not mean you cannot be a designer, or artist. Use the least you have to get yourself closer to what you want to be. ND: Are you getting any backing from your family in all this? BH: Yes, my family has been very supportive to my career and they always make sure I know they are behind whatever I need for my projects. Without them, I would have never managed to even start my show.