BY TAWANDA TAFIRENYIKA FORMER FC Platinum goalkeeper Wallace Magalane could seal a move to the Absa Premiership in South Africa with reports suggesting he has impressed Chippa United.
Several local Premier Soccer League clubs, including Caps United, Highlanders and Ngezi Platinum, are aware of his availability on the market following the expiry of his contract with the Zvishavane-based side on December 31 and are waiting in the wings to pounce. Chippa United are under the guidance of former FC Platinum coach Norman Mapeza, who worked with Magalane during his time at the club and is understood to be trying to bring him on board as he seeks to save his team from relegation. However, Magalane’s move to South Africa is subject to the availability of a slot for a foreign quota. Mapeza is understood to be hoping to squeeze him into the squad should a slot open up. Gibson Mahachi, who manages the player, said the deal to join Chippa was dependent on the availability of a foreign quota. “Chippa United are interested in Magalane, but it will depend on whether there is a slot for a foreign quota. In the event that he fails to join Chippa, he will have to join one of the local teams. At the moment, there is interest from Caps, Highlanders and Ngezi Platinum. They all want to sign him, but all this will depend on the unavailability of a slot for a foreign quota at Chippa,” he said. Magalane is one of the heroes of the 2019 campaign who helped FC Platinum to win a third straight championship after beating rivals Caps and Chicken Inn to the finishing line. He co-ordinated well with his then captain Petros Mhari and that the Zvishavane-based side went on to win the championship on the last day of the league programme when they edged Caps 1-0 is largely due to their defensive solidity. Mapeza took over the reins at Chippa in October after the club parted ways with Clinton Larsen following a string of dreadful results. When the former FC Platinum coach took over, the club sat at the bottom of the table, with their future in the Absa Premiership looking doomed, but they have leapt to 10th place with 21 points from 18 matches, 20 behind log leaders Kaizer Chiefs. A few weeks after arriving at Chippa, Mapeza warned that the team would struggle because they did not have quality players.
He said his side needed new faces.