BY TAFADZWA KACHIKO A DOMINICAN Coventry pupil Shamiso Ariel Chiza broke down in joy when she was crowned the Miss Zimbabwe Schools queen after she shrugged off competition at the pageant held on Monday at a Harare hotel. For her efforts, Chiza is set to represent the country in Philadelphia. Greystone Park Academy’s Azaria Ndawa and Aisha Gandawa from First Choice Private School were crowned the first and second princesses, respectively. Notwithstanding her excellent modelling skills and well-designed costumes in most categories, Chiza told NewsDay Life & Style that she could not believe that her dream had come true. “I was a bit nervous as the competition was tough. It was not obvious that I was going to win. Anyone else could have won. Although the journey to the competition was not easy, it was an eye-opener, I am so excited,” she said. “I started modelling in 2018 and since then, I have been preparing for this achievement. I have worked hard towards this pageant. I am glad that I have made it and I am grateful that I will be representing Zimbabwe in Philadelphia.” Chiza said she would assist vulnerable children, especially those with autism spectrum disorder. “During my reign, I intend to help unfortunate children. I have a soft spot for those with autism because a lot of people tend to look down upon them. I want to encourage people to treat them the same way they treat others. It’s my wish that every child gets access to education,” she said. Her mother Josephine said she supported her daughter from the time she discovered her interest in music. “It’s very important to support our children in all their positive endeavours. If a child has talent, you have to nurture it. Support your child for a bright future. They will be able to fend for themselves and support others,” she said. Ndawa said she was happy to be crowned the first princess in her debut appearance at a pageant. “I am grateful that I will be going to the United States. It means a lot to me. This pageant taught me that no matter what happens in life, you still have a long way to go. You should never give up, but keep on pushing,” she said. Ndawa’s mother Rachael Gwisai also said children’s dreams needed parental support. “Every child’s dream should be followed. Not all of us are academically gifted, so if somebody has a talent in the arts, let it be upheld to make it come true. Let them follow their dreams,” she said. Miss Zim Schools was launched in 2017 by Zinzile Mantiziba and this year’s edition was organised in partnership with Miss High Schools Africa. Follow us on Twitter @NewsDayZimbabwe