BY FIDELITY MHLANGA ZIMBABWE Stock Exchange-listed, roofing products and pipes maker, Turnall Holdings has announced that Zvidzayi Bikwa is taking over from Rose Chisveto. Chisveto left the company on August 31 2020 after her contract was not renewed. She was acting MD from 2016 to 2018 before being appointed substantively to the post from 2018 to 2020. “She left on 31 August 2020. Samson Mavende was the acting MD from September to November 2020,” a source revealed. “Her (Chisveto) contract was a fixed term contract and after it expired it was not renewed. She was appointed acting MD in 2016 until 2018 and then she was substantive MD from 2018 until August 2020.” Chisveto rose to the apex of the company after her predecessor Caleb Musodza and then FD Kenias Horonga left the company amid allegations of abusing company funds in 2016. Contacted for comment Chisveto said she was concentrating on personal business. “Yes my contract ended and I am now pursuing personal interests.   My tenure at Turnall was fulfilling. You wouldn’t leave when the business is collapsing,” Chisveto said. “Having gained the experience of taking the company from a loss position to a profit-making position, it’s quite fulfilling for me. You know at our age we need to build something of our own to prepare for retirement. So I am using the experience I acquired to venture into personal business.” Announcing Bikwa’s appointment, board chairman Bothwell Nyajeka last week said the new boss had vast industry experience spanning more than two decades. Bikwa has previously worked for blue-chip companies across African markets. “The Turnall Holdings board is pleased to announce the appointment of Mr Zvidzayi “Ziggy” Bikwa as the managing director with effect from 1 December 2020. Ziggy has 22 years of experience gained across African markets, predominantly in the fast-moving consumer goods (FMCG) manufacturing industry in various capacities from general manager to chief executive officer,” Nyajeka said. “He is the previous chief executive officer of Pioneer Foods SA in Nigeria, managing director of Catercraft P/L, and spent twelve years with Innscor Africa as general manager. He holds a B Com Degree in Economics, Msc Tourism (UZ) and MBL (Unisa). “The board, management and staff welcome Ziggy to the Turnall Holdings family and look forward to a successful tenure under his leadership.” Nyajeka took over from Rita Likukuma who retired by rotation at the annual general meeting held on June 30 2020.
He assumed the board chairmanship on July 8, 2020.