ACTION returns to Bulawayo Motorsport Park this Saturday as drivers and bikers tussle in the annual Castrol Three-Hour Endurance Race. BY FORTUNE MBELE It is the first and probably the only race that will be held this year due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The race will be held under strict COVID-19 regulations. A number of drivers have confirmed their participation. Darren Pragji, one of the familiar faces at previous races, will be unavailable this time around as he is taking part in another race in South Africa. However, it still promises to be an action-packed event as some drivers have already confirmed taking part. Jim and Hamish Perry will be driving the BMW e36 turbo and the BMW e46 turbo respectively. They confirmed their participation by posting on Facebook: “We have come second for two years, please, can we win this year?” Another seasoned driver, Byron Norman who drives a Mitsubishi Evo, will also attend. “What a race last year; near perfect pit stop and a third for it. This year, we are going for gold so sit back and watch the race with social distancing while we get as close as we can on track. See you all there.  I can’t wait,” Norman said. John Dube, who drives a Toyota Starlet, is also excited to be part of the race. “It has been my desire to reach this far. This race will be my first; it was not easy, but the grace of God took me this far. Speed wins the race. It all starts from a strong heart. I have that heart. Eagerly awaiting for the race, for the fastest,” Dube said. On the one-hour endurance race for the bikers is Matthew Schults who will ride a Yamaha R6. “That time of the year yet again! I can’t say how happy I am to be able to compete in this prestigious event. The one-hour endurance race is not one to be missed, with lots of competition from all around. It’s going to be a good one. Last year was a close battle for the win as I ended in second place. This year, we hope to take the trophy home. I will be racing my Yamaha R6 again this year. A big thank you to all the sponsors involved in making this event possible as well as the amazing sponsors who have put me on the starting grid,” Schults said. Endurance racing is a type of motorsport that tests the durability of both vehicles and drivers.