President Cyril Ramaphosa has announced that South Africa will, from today at midnight, move to an adjusted Level 3 of the lockdown in the fight against the spread of the coronavirus (COVID-19). He says the number of new coronavirus cases is rising in an “alarming and unprecedented manner.” Since Christmas Eve, there have been more than 50 000 new cases. Addressing the nation, Ramaphosa identified the KwaZulu-Natal, Western Cape, Gauteng, and Eastern Cape as the leading the new cases. Limpopo is also seeing an increase in the number of coronavirus cases. The president has also announced the adjusted Level 3 regulations. “Under the adjusted Level 3 regulations: All indoor and outdoor gatherings will be prohibited for 14 days from the date hereof, except for funerals and other limited exceptions as detailed in the regulations, such as restaurants, museums, gyms, and casinos.” The curfew has also been extended. “The nationwide curfew will be extended from 9pm to 6am. Apart from permitted workers and for medical and security emergencies, nobody is allowed outside their place of residence during the curfew.” The new regulations will also see non-essential establishments closing earlier. “Non-essential establishments – including shops, restaurants, bars, and all cultural venues – must close at 8pm. The list of these establishments will be released shortly.” The sale of alcohol has also been banned. “Night clubs and businesses engaged in the sale and transportation of liquor will not be allowed to operate. The Level 3 restrictions will remain in place until 15 January 2021. These measures will be reviewed at that time on the basis of the state of the pandemic in the country.” To curb the spread of the virus, President Ramaphosa says those who do not wear masks will be punished. “From now on, it is compulsory for every person to wear a mask in a public space. A person who does not wear a cloth mask covering over the nose and mouth in a public place will be committing an offence. A person who does not wear a mask could be arrested and prosecuted. On conviction, they will be liable to a fine or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months or to both a fine and imprisonment.” More areas have been declared hotspots. “In the Western Cape, the West Coast District, Overberg District, Winelands District, Cape Town, Central Karoo District are hotspots. This is in addition to the Garden Route District.” New Level 3 lockdown adjustments: Lockdown:
SA moves from Level 1 back to Level 3 of the lockdown Curfew:
The curfew has been extended from 9am to 6am. Alcohol: Mask: Gatherings: