AFTER its premiere about eight months ago, local television series Marbles will finally be screening on the national broadcaster, ZBC-Tv, every Saturday evening. BY TAFADZWA KACHIKO The series marketing and communications manager Boniface Chimedza told NewsDay Life & Style yesterday that the delay was necessitated by the need to perfect it before dishing it out to the public. “After last year’s premiere we took note of constructive criticism from fellow filmmakers and made improvements on some scenes, especially on sound. “The process delayed us quite a bit,” he said. “Our final post production was again largely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic lockdown as we had limited access to our studio for months and as a result the wait became long.”
Directed by Manuel Matsinye and produced under Megacom Pictures and Matchmo Media, Marbles explores challenges being faced by particularly women, youths and the vulnerable. “The wait is over. Marbles is coming to your home screens on Saturday. “Stay tuned on ZBC-Tv at exactly 2130hrs and enjoy the series. It is a production that artistically explores central issues affecting ordinary Zimbabweans’ livelihoods,” said Chimedza. “The series is a virtual window that reflects challenges faced by women, youths and the vulnerable in society. “Marbles boasts a unique dual plot urban and rural whose fascinating sub-plots will keep film lovers glued to their screens,” she said. Chimedza, who plays the character Thomas, said Marbles was hinged on several themes such as friendship, love, romance, peer pressure, teenage pregnancies, drug abuse, among others. “The plot is centred on four women who are childhood friends and grew up together as best friends. They are the Marbles. They go to the same schools from kindergarten to university,” he said. “They all marry and through them, their husbands become best friends. “Tragedy strikes when one of the four women kills her husband and asks the three friends to help her cover up the murder, which they reluctantly do, becoming accomplices to the crime in the process. “The story revolves around this plot and other sub-plots in an exciting dramatic fashion that also explores a rich rural plot,” he said. The series feature a huge cast which includes four main actresses, Gloria Zengeya, who plays Martha, Kate Mtandwa (Precious), Victoria Maposa (Portia), Precious Tafirenyika (Anita) and it also features veteran actor Lovejoy Mwaoneka (who plays Dhangwezi).