BY CHELSEA MUSAFARE PRODUCERS of a new local movie, Kuroorwa kwaChipo said their latest project, a one hour 20-minute production that focuses on issues of tradition and culture, will premiere on March 27 at Winwood College in Harare. In a recent interview with NewsDay Life & Style, one of the producers, Melody Mutyavaviri said the film that includes traditional marriages and funeral rites themes was motivated by the new education curriculum. “The film Kuroorwa kwaChipo will encompass pupils as part of the cast to empower them with film-making skills as fulfilment of the objectives of the new education curriculum. The main actor Chipo is also a student. They (Students) were drawn from Winwood College, Watershed College and Prince Edward School and will be blended in with professional actors,” she said. “In this film we are training students so that they learn about acting, script writing, directing, cinematography, editing, lighting, sound recording and production design. The students took part in learning about film production both behind and in front of the camera.” The movie’s co-producer and writer Charles Mutyavaviri said he has unveiled a film foundation programme meant to teach high school students fundamental skills in film production in line with the new curriculum. The 20-member movie cast will include veteran and popular actor Zolile Makeleni, who plays Tsotsi in another local movie, Wenera. Mutyavaviri said Kuroorwa kwaChipo, revolves around Chipo who is about to get married to Tinotenda, but the love story is not as rosy as the couple would have wished. Murambiwa comes into the picture to brew trouble in paradise. “The movie is meant to teach young people about heritage and cultural issues around the rites of passage to do with customary marriage and what happens during funeral processes,” Mutyavaviri said. “The movie is going to be better in terms of the production values. It will be shot in 4K resolution. The movie will also be different in that it will incorporate young people from high school as part of the cast as well as part of the production team.” The film will be Mutyavaviris’ second project after their 2010 debut, Sores of Emmanuel. The two are also the producers of ZBC’s Pregnancy and Parenting Talk Show.