No leader can do all things at all times, and delegation is a key tool for boosting team and organisational performance and efficiency. Delegation in leadership not only helps get things done, but it also empowers employees by giving them greater autonomy. The best leaders know they cannot meet their goals alone; they need the right people doing the right things. Leadership means delegating to the right people to get the job done right. Leadership is not about doing everything yourself. When you do too much, you are setting your company up for failure. Regardless of why, if you operate this way, it will affect your business for a long time. You need to get your organisation to the point that resources other than you can operate with efficiency and up to your expectations even in your absence.   By default, anyone who owns a business or manages a team has the title of leader, but in my consulting experience, I find that just having the title doesn’t make most of us a true example of the word. Being the leader means that you have been placed in a position to serve others. It is about how we treat people, how we make decisions and the example we set. It’s about looking for every opportunity to appreciate and inspire others. Leadership is not a right, but a privilege. You are privileged to be in a position where you can direct, shape and positively influence the lives of others. Leadership is defined by the way you think and the way you behave and it should be noted that we all have the capability to be leaders. Leadership is not about power. Leadership naturally comes with power, but to lead people with character and produce trust is not compatible with being primarily concerned with acquiring and using power. The most powerful leaders are those who earn trust and stay trustworthy. If you are in a leadership position, then you should know that you have a responsibility to your team. They look to you for guidance and strength and that is part of what being a leader is. And a big part of your responsibility is to lead them with your own actions. We are not expecting all leaders to be perfect since we are all human, but if they want positive change to take hold, they must walk the talk to get followers. When leaders do not “practice what they preach,” it can be almost impossible for a team to work together successfully.
Leadership is not about doing all the communicating. Great leaders are almost always great communicators, but more importantly they are  great listeners. They do not interrupt or talk over others; they listen more than they speak and they know that the most basic of all human needs is the need to understand and be understood. Effective communication and effective leadership are closely intertwined. Leaders need to be skilled communicators. Good communication skills are required at every level of business. Control is not leadership; management is not leadership, but leadership is leadership. Leadership is defined by results, not attributes because results speak louder than actions, not the old saying which says, action speaks louder than words: “Results matter”. Those who seek to lead and be best leaders in the 21st century should invest their time in leading themselves before leading others. To be a good leader you must also first learn to follow, only a leader who has followed well knows how to lead others well. Leadership is not about titles, positions, or anything else; but it is about one life influencing others, it is about positive actions. It is very crucial to note that leadership is a journey that needs to be experienced and the real-life experiences shape the leader’s persona. Good leaders push their people forward with excitement, inspiration, trust and vision. If you lead a team that does not trust you, productivity will drop. Enthusiasm may disappear. The vision you are trying so hard to make happen may lose its appeal, all because your team does not trust you anymore. To be an effective leader, you must understand your own motivations, strengths and weaknesses. Great leaders connect with their team by facilitating open communication, encouraging employee growth and development, and giving and receiving feedback. Effective leaders have major impacts on not only the team members they manage, but also their company as a whole. Employees who work under great leaders tend to be happier, more productive and more connected to their organisation. Good leaders have the emotional intelligence to understand and accept that change is inevitable. Instead of trying to maintain a status quo just for the sake of consistency, embrace change and innovation. Effective leaders teach employees instead of giving orders. An effective leader knows how to show others what is required, rather than simply telling them. Leaders should coach their team members toward a more collaborative and committed work environment. If you are always doing everything on your own, you are not going to get the level of engagement that you are looking for. Instead of simply barking orders at team members, good leaders should encourage growth by teaching.  Leaders need to be teaching so they can grow new leaders to take their place. Great leadership has many components, and delegation is an important factor for maximising employee contributions and increasing productivity among all members of a team. Here are four reasons why delegation is essential for effective leadership. Some leaders make the mistake of trying to do everything and be everywhere. This leads to overwhelm and burnout. Delegating is part of the job description. If someone has a goal to learn negotiation, delegate out your next negotiation or let them join you. Be thoughtful about allocating tasks based on what your people care about. Being thoughtful like this builds an unwavering level of loyalty. When leaders delegate certain tasks to others, they become free to focus on higher-value activities and use their time more productively. Delegation not only gives leaders time for strategic thinking, but it also allows them to focus on other tasks that only they can perform, such as leading and coaching their teams. Great leaders perfect the art of delegation. Leaders can’t do it alone.  Emmanuel Zvada is a human capital consultant and an international recruitment expert. He writes in his personal capacity.