editorial comment AT a time government is clinically broke, it is utterly shocking — to say the least, that the same government is exempting big money spinners from paying tax and busy squeezing to death the poorest in the country. If the exemption was for a year or two, one would not really mind. But in this case government has exempted technological giant Huawei from paying tax for 11 years after it backdated the exemption to 2009. Even more scandalous is the fact that government’s decision to exempt the Chinese company from paying tax was not approved by Parliament. Through Cabinet, government has habitually been by-passing the Legislature despite this being constitutionally gross. And so the Zimbabwe Coalition on Debt and Development (Zimcodd)’s call on government to respect the country’s Constitution should be buttressed by all well-meaning citizens because President Emmerson Mnangagwa’s government is increasingly exhibiting every characteristic of a pariah State. Zimcodd was apt in expressing its own shock at government’s behaviour when it said: “It is, therefore, worrisome that the government has decided to give the foreign monopoly tax exemption backdating 11 years ago when the same government is milking the ordinary citizen through the unpopular and unjust 2% intermediated money transfer tax, among a host of other retrogressive taxes.” It then boggles the mind to try and understand the rationale used by government to exempt that single foreign company from paying tax. Has the company been paying tax in the first place? Why is this company getting this preferential treatment? Is the government or the people of Zimbabwe benefiting from this opaque arrangement? Why did government not also exempt other companies from paying tax? By continuously by-passing Parliament, is government indirectly telling us that the institution is no longer relevant? It is quite perplexing that government appears to have a serious penchant to always behave in the most uncanny manner when one least expects it. Coming at a time government has been telling the world that it is committed to observing the tenets of good governance, this incident and many others in the past, only serve to paint Mnangagwa and his government as experts of double speak. We pray and hope for the day this new dispensation wakes up doing the right things that spruce up its image. As it is, it keeps on losing the plot. Its behaviour, as far as governance is concerned, has so far been atrocious, to say the least.