BY TAWANDA TAFIRENYIKA HARARE football giants Caps United have signed Herentals and Warriors midfielder Richard Hachiro in one of their biggest captures in the transfer window as the former champions seek to regain hegemonic status on the domestic soccer scene. Caps United won the coveted championship in 2016 under the guidance of Lloyd Chitembwe in what was a major milestone for the club that had last won the title way back in 2005, when they won back-to-back championships under the guidance of Charles Mhlauri. Having endured the frustration of living in the shadows of FC Platinum, who have dominated domestic football in the past three years, Caps United believe it is high time they reclaimed the honours. The Green Machine added Hachiro yesterday to a long list of stars who have already joined, as Darlington Dodo reconstructs the side that came agonisingly close to winning the championship only to be beaten to the finishing line on the last day of the league programme by FC Platinum last season. The news of Hachiro’s arrival was posted on the club’s official Facebook page, where he was pictured with Dodo. “Welcome to the Green Machine Richard Hachiro. He joins us from @HerentalsFc. Another national team player in our camp. A great season awaits,” the post read. The former Herentals midfielder was once described by legendary former Dynamos and Warriors coach Sunday Chidzambga as one of the best midfielders in the country. Hachiro, who plays in central midfield, joins several other stars who include the trio of Ishmael Wadi, Tatenda Tumba and Munyaradzi Diro-Nyenye, all from Harare City, Yadah duo of Leeroy Mavhunga and Enock Karembo as well as centreback Carlos Mavhurume. Former FC Platinum goalkeeper Wallace Magalane has also joined the Harare football giants. With Caps United having decided against renewing the contracts of goalkeepers Prosper Chigumba and Chris Mverechena, Magalane is set to compete with Tonderai Mateyaunga for keeping the goals. Caps United are also expecting at least three players from Nigeria whom they want to assess over a two-week period with a view to signing them before the start of the campaign. In a major clean-up, the Green Machine did not renew contracts of several players, among them Hardlife Zvirekwi, Dominic Mukandi, Carlos Rusere, Lincoln Zvasiya and Valentine Ndaba as they seek a fresh start to make up for the disappointment of the last campaign, which saw them  finishing in third place, having spent the better part of the campaign leading the standings. However, with seniors like Ronald “Rooney” Chitiyo, Phineas Bhamusi, Justice Jangano, Valentine Musarurwa, John Zhuwawu and Kelvin Ndebele, among others, having been retained, the Green Machine promises to be a formidable side in this coming campaign.