2017 was designated as the “first year of virtual currency.” Despite some enthusiastic attention as a new asset management method, the virtual currency outflow problem that occurred consecutively from the end of the year to 2018 has occurred. It seems that the direction of the wind changed all at once. Is virtual currency an uncertain currency? Yuka Tanimoto, Deputy Editor-in-Chief of Forbes Editorial Department, approaches Mr. Hitoshi Taguchi, President and CEO of DMM Bitcoin, regarding the current location of virtual currency and its potential in the future. Cryptocurrency has been over and the “original value” of cryptocurrency has been attracting attention Recently, cryptocurrency and tokens have been attracting attention, but on the other hand, from the end of last year to this year, some of the cryptocurrency leaked out to the negative It seems that the problem has happened and the enthusiasm has ended. As you say, in 2017, virtual currencies were a hot topic in 2017. Around the youth with high sensitivity and early adopters, early majority started cryptocurrency trading, following it. However, there was a spillage problem, and the flow calmed down. As a result, the eyes began to turn to “blockchain technology,” which is the basis of virtual currency. I think that the next one or two years will be the key to how virtual currencies and tokens will be accepted by society after the technology has been better understood and identified. To become a bitcoin billionaire, one must use proper techniques and have knowledge Why bitcoin is popular? Is this the last year or two? Yes. Laws are being developed in countries around the world. At one point in time, Japan was in the forefront of legal development from a global perspective, but now Singapore and the United States are slightly ahead of the table and are trying to put laws and regulations in such a way that they can be incorporated into a portion of securities. It seems. In Japan, transactions are based on the Fund Settlement Law, but in Japan it will probably be decided whether or not it is within the scope of application of financial law regulations such as the Financial Instruments and Exchange Act, in light of the actual situation. .. Some people may feel that volatility (price volatility) decreases as laws and regulations advance, making it less attractive as an asset management destination. Certainly some people may find it uninteresting, but that is a small part. Rather, if the majority of the law allows for stable asset formation as a result of legislative progress, I think that they would like to adopt it as part of the asset class (investment target). In fact, a number of stable coins with secured value linked to legal currency have been issued, and major financial institutions and companies are also issuing virtual currencies. There is no doubt that virtual currency will become easier to spread if the social infrastructure is improved. The Central Bank and Net Gulliver are rivals of virtual currencies Some virtual currency exchanges have a decentralized model of currency distribution, rather than a centralized one. There are some conflicting regulations. How do you come to terms with this area? When considering a decentralized model, it may be helpful to understand the meaning of virtual currency in the first place. Virtual currencies are making game changes to two existing organizations. What do you think it is? That’s a good read. One is the “financial village”. We are implementing game changes for so-called central banks and securities companies that control currencies. The existing financial industry is a so-called centralized database network where transactions and settlements are centrally performed. In contrast, virtual currencies utilize distributed ledger technology and have no issuers or managers. Even if there are any, they are trying to replace the existing model by adopting a consortium-type distributed model. And the other is “Net Gulliver”. Since the advent of the Internet, various existing things have been replaced. Letters and phones for email and chat, physical stores for e-commerce. In the process, only IT companies were ranked high in market capitalization such as Amazon, Google, and Facebook. They provided content in a freemium model based on advertising revenue and a fixed-price subscription model, replacing the radio wave and broadcasting fields that were regulated by the country until then, making it a highly profitable business. The model was approved.