THE outbreak of the coronavirus was declared a public health emergency of international concern. The virus continues to tear the world apart with a mortality of more than 285 000 as of yesterday. As with other respiratory infections like flu or the common cold, public health measures are critical to slow the spread of the COVID-19. Public health measures are everyday preventive actions that include: lStaying home when sick lCovering mouth and nose with elbow or tissue when coughing or sneezing lWashing hands often with water and soap lCleaning frequently touched surfaces and objects Questions have been raised about when and how schools will open. It is unknown when COVID-19 will end and today, children and young people are global citizens, powerful agents of change and the next generation of caregivers, scientists, doctors, nurses, pilots. A crisis like COVID-19 pandemic presents children with the opportunity to learn, cultivate compassion and increase resilience while building a safer and caring community. Having the correct information about COVID-19 will help diminish students’ fears and anxieties around the disease and support their ability to cope with any secondary impacts in their lives. Who knows, the virus can be our serious guest for even two or so years. Can schools remain closed then? Considering the virulence of COVID-19, many questions have been raised about the safety of opening schools. It should be noted that maintaining safe school operations or re-opening schools after a closure requires many considerations which if adhered to, can promote public health. The school has three pillars that make them run smoothly: teachers, pupils and guardians. The chemistry among these stakeholders is of importance if schools are to be opened.
So many cries have been made to the government to open Grade 7, O-Level and A-Level so that their examinations are not disturbed. It is a wise idea. Our pupils need to finish their learning despite the scourge, but it is prudent that the three pillars in education put their heads together to make it possible. I will look at the pillars and their expected roles: School administrators and teachers Following basic principles and measures can help students, teachers and other staff and that will be important in stopping the spread of COVID-19. This, therefore, calls for robust preparations so that opening becomes possible. Recommendations would include the following: lSchools should provide reliable water, sanitation and waste management facilities and follow environmental cleaning and decontamination procedures. This has to be done now before pupils return. Parents/caregivers Parents are critical to their children and they can play important roles on the following: Students Students should understand basic age-appropriate information about COVID-19 that includes symptoms, mode of transmission, complications or prevention of transmission. Social media information may be destructive, hence it should be treated with caution. Therefore, students have a duty to do the following: lAvoid touching their faces —thorough health education about touching faces or mucous membranes should be done. For many, it is a mannerism to touch nostrils, eyes or mouth. Considering the above measures, it can be noted that many schools still lack resources to put in place the correct measures. A lot of government support is needed.
Our government should move with speed with the assistance of the donor community to ensure there is water and sanitation at many schools. Sanitisers should be supplied in large volumes to schools while health officials should be in the proximity to ensure public health measures are adhered to. My suggestion, therefore, is that examination classes be opened as soon as possible as fewer students will be taken into schools thus putting less pressure on the few available resources. COVID-19 has the potential to spread to the entire nation through one infected student. We have to be very alert as we contemplate opening schools. Johannes Marisa is a medical doctor and a public health practitioner who writes in his own capacity. He can be accessed on doctormarisa@gmail.com.