NEW FC Platinum forward Elias Maguri wants to end the club’s goal-scoring problems both in the Premier Soccer league and in the Caf Champions League where they have constantly faltered. BY TERRY MADYAUTA While it is pleasing that they reached the group phase on two consecutive campaigns, scoring has been their main drawback once in the group phase. In both campaigns, they finished at the bottom of the group table, managing a paltry three points combined, while scoring only four goals. Even during Norman Mapeza’s tenure at the helm, they relied on the midfielders to do the business with Rodwell Chinyengetere carrying the burden. The trio of Mkhokeli Dube, Charles Sibanda and Albert Eonde could not reach a combined 10-goal mark and were all shown the exit and replaced by Stanley Ngala, Silas Songani, Ellie ILunga and Maguri. Songani has already given a flicker of what he could offer the Zvishavane side when he scored a brace that helped them win the Castle Challenge Cup against Highlanders. And Tanzanian forward Maguri, who joined the PSL champions from Zambian side Nakampala Leopards where he had just notched five goals, has pledged that he will make an instant impact at the Zvishavane side. “FC Platinum is a very good team and the fact that they have won the championship three times in a row makes me confident that I am part of a winning team,” he told NewsDay Sport. “I came here to add value, to score goals as much as I can. FC Platinum has a lot of quality players and I intend to also become a part of the bigger picture, so my role is to ensure that I carry out my job and tasks as diligently as I possibly can. “It’s very important to prove my pedigree in such a big team so that my stay here is worthwhile and I hope that chance will come soon,” he said. Had it not been for the coronavirus-induced lockdown, Maguri could have made his league debut for the platinum miners. The 24-year-old began his professional career in 2011 in his home country, Tanzania. He played for Tanzania Prisons, Ruvu Shooting Stars, Simba in 2014 and joined Stand United in 2015. He also played in Asia, for Dhofar FC in Oman from 2016 to 2017 before returning to Africa for a short stint at KMC and later joined Nakampala Leopards in Tanzania.