THE National Arts Council of Zimbabwe (NACZ) has released a star-studded line-up of artistes — including some of the country’s finest — who will take turns to entertain people as the curtains come down on the Culture Week tomorrow. BY WINSTONE ANTONIO The music concert, which will be beamed live on ZBC-TV and some social media platforms, will feature Jeys Marabini, Albert Nyathi, Kireni Zulu, King 98, Ti Gonzi, Ishan, Guspy Warrior, Kinnah, Hope Masike, Tammy Moyo , Selmor Mtukudzi, Willis Wataffi, Peter Moyo, Blessing Chimanga and Mathias Mhere. This year’s edition of the annual Culture Week event, running under the theme Zimbabwe @ 40, Celebrating our Cultural Diversity and Heritage, was launched online following a ban on public gatherings because of the lockdown implemented by the government to curtail the spread of the coronavirus (COVID-19). The programme included an online discussion to celebrate International Museums Day through an online conversation between International Organisation of Museums of United Kingdom, The British Council, The National Gallery of Zimbabwe (NGZ), Victoria Albert Museum and the Mori Museum of Japan. An online discussion led by NACZ on the impact of COVID-19 on traditional Zimbabwean cultural practices was also beamed while the NGZ showcased an online visual exhibition dubbed Freedom through the Eyes of General Tongo and online Harare conversations. In her address at the launch on Monday, Youth, Sport, Arts and Recreation minister Kirsty Coventry said this year’s edition of Culture Week was significant as it came at a time when families were spending a lot of time together due to the national lockdown measures. She urged parents to use the opportunity to inculcate cultural practices in their children. “This provides an opportunity for us as Zimbabweans to appreciate and enhance our own knowledge and understanding of our own culture and those of others around us,” she said. Coventry underscored the importance of acknowledging and recognising cultural diversity through the innovative use of media and information and communication technologies to promote dialogue among civilisations and cultures, respect, and mutual understanding,” she said. “I would like to commend the creative and sporting personalities in the country who have fully embraced technology and have utilised it to inform and educate us about COVID-19 as well as entertain us during this national lockdown,” she said. Culture Week is an annual event hosted by the Youth ministry through NACZ and coincides with the Unesco World Day for Cultural Diversity for Dialogue and Development which falls on May 21 every year.