FORMER Shabanie Mine and FC Platinum star Rowan Nenzou is dreaming big for the rural community of Filabusi, where he aims to establish a football hub. BY FORTUNE MBELE Nenzou, who also played for Black Rhinos, was appointed Zifa Central Region Division One side Filabusi United head coach where he started in mid-February and was only two months into the job before the COVID-19 pandemic struck. It’s his first job as head coach, having been roped in on an interim basis at struggling Shabanie Mine in
2018 when the club parted ways with Takesure Chiragwi. Nenzou (37) then assisted Alexio Sigion who was appointed substantive coach but Shabanie went on to be relegated that year. “I want to develop football in Filabusi. that is my aim. I want to tap as much talent as I can because when I
arrived here in February, I discovered that talent is abundant. Two months into the job I had unearthed four-five
young players who I am impressed with but then came the coronavirus. What these boys are lacking is just exposure and marketing,” Nenzou said. The Caf-B license holder says he wants to further his coaching studies as football was changing everyday. “I want to be successful as a coach. I need to learn and I am taking it step by step. I’m inspired by (Taurayi) Mangwiro locally. I admire his style. I think I have matured now as a coach. The job at Filabusi is a challenge for me. I want to see how far I can go as a coach. I am grabbing the opportunity with both hands. To be a champion one has to compete with the champions.” He says he learnt a lot from John Phiri, whom he assisted at Division One side MSU in 2016. He also picked up some valuable lessons while at Shabanie and assisted John Nyikadzino for five months at Shesham last year. “I learnt a lot from these guys which I can use while at Filabusi. I appreciate being given that opportunity to learn. I need to be learning everyday and if there is anyone that I would love to work with in the near future, it’s Mangwiro. “Our contracts ran out at MSU and they were not renewed and unfortunately at Shabanie, the team was relegated. At Shesham I had some challenges and I had to move on.”