CANADA-BASED Zimbabwean supermodel Yolanda Chimbarami has spread her wings off the ramp with the launch of an online show, Talk the Walk which unpacks various issues related to the arts. BY WINSTONE ANTONIO Chimbarami told NewsDay Life & Style from her base that the show was aimed at educating up-and-coming models through dialogue with modelling gurus. “I always get messages from people asking me about my modelling journey and steps to take to become a model, so I thought to myself, why not start an online show where everyone in the arts shares their experiences? That’s how  came to life,” she said. “I firmly believe that knowledge is power. The reason why we have a lot of cases where models are abused or labelled otherwise, or people who just wake up claiming they are models is because of lack of information. “Some people do not know that for you to be a model you have to be professionally trained, and you have to have an agency,” Chimbarami said. She said the show would also provide a platform for players in various art disciplines to share their struggles and experiences. “This show is also a platform where everyone in the arts industry connects. If you look at it, we are all connected one way or the other. Edgars needs models, and singers need dancers or songwriters. It all falls under the arts industry, but we can only do this if we are all supportive and appreciative of each other’s work,” she said. “People don’t realise that a lot goes on behind the scenes and at the end of the day, it’s that lovely picture we get to see on different social media platforms like Instagram or Facebook and that amazing song we all sing along to, but in reality, a lot goes into the preparation process. Most importantly, this is a platform where we inspire each other and inspire others to get involved in art,” she said. In the first edition of the Talk the Walk last week, the beauty queen hosted modelling guru Mercy “Catwalk” Mushaninga who shared her experiences and tips on how to succeed in the industry. Chimbarami recently broke new ground after landing acting roles in the movie, How It Ends and Snowed Inn. The projects afforded her an opportunity to rub shoulders with internationally acclaimed actors. In the Netflix movie, How It Ends, the former Miss Harare Junior had a golden chance to work alongside Theo James famed for his lead role in the film, Divergent. Before relocating to Canada, Chimbarami had been focusing on commercial modelling and she had the privilege to work with the best designers, among them Nigeria-based TIR brand owner, Danielle Ellen and David Tlale, a South African top designer, alongside fashion retailers Edgars and Jet.