DYNAMOS team doctor Robert Masara is pleased with captain Patson Jaure’s recovery from head injuries and is optimistic that the defender will be able to start the Premier Soccer League (PSL) season when it gets underway. BY TAWANDA TAFIRENYIKA Jaure was involved in a car accident earlier this year and is going through rehabilitation after undergoing surgery. He had been ruled out of the first half of the PSL season, but due to the COVID-19 induced delay to the start to the season, he was afforded more time to recover. Zimbabwe’s topflight league is not expected to start any time before August. Masara sees the delay of the season as a silver lining in a dark cloud with respect to the Dynamos and Warriors defender. “The lockdown is in a way a blessing in disguise for Jaure.  He will have enough to recover. So far he has already started his rehabilitation process. He is in jovial mood right now and  by the time the season kicks off he will have  fully recovered,” Masara said. Jaure had been named in the African Nations Championships (Chan) squad, while Warriors coach Zdravko Logarusic had also called him up for the Africa Cup of Nations qualifying match against Algeria, which  like other international engagements was postponed due to the COVID-19 pandemic. His recovery will excite Dynamos fans who are looking to see their captain return to the club he left after helping them win four successive league titles and in the process attracting the interest of South African Premiership side Pretoria University  who handed him a contract. Following the expiry of his contract, Jaure returned to join ambitious Mhondoro-based side Ngezi Platinum before switching to Manica Diamonds where he played until last season. The defender also led a group of home-based Warriors to the semi finals at the  2014 African Nations Championship in South Africa in 2014. He is again expected to captain the current squad under Logarusic at the same tournament in Cameroon should the football authorities decide to go ahead with the tournament this year.