BY FREEMAN MAKOPA Former ZPC attacker Blessing Nyamuziwa has set his sights on a move to South Africa, but his plans have been hampered by the coronavirus pandemic. The 20-year-old has not renewed his contract with ZPC as he is now focused on greener pastures. “Currently I’m free. I have no contract with any team but there are clubs that have shown interest in South Africa. But everything can only start moving when the COVID-19 fight is over,” he said. “The only challenge that I’m facing is that I was waiting for the South African league to end, that’s when I am going to negotiate with the teams. But because of the COVID-19, I will have to wait,” he said. He said playing alongside veterans such as Method Mwanjali and Leonard Tsipa at Caps United gave him the desire to want to reach greater heights as he was exposed to a lot of experience. “Football life is never easy because you go through many phases, but you need to prevail at the end. “It was inspiring and encouraging playing in the topflight against and alongside legends like Method Mwanjali, Leonard Tsipa and David Kutyauripo just to mention a few. Those guys inspired me and I thought that if they played up to such an advanced age and achieved things in football, why can’t I do the same?” He broke into the topflight when he was signed by Caps United while he was still a schoolboy and made his debut in the Big Harare derby. “My journey started when I was signed by one of the biggest teams in the country while I was still going to school. At Caps I played for a season and half before I moved to Harare City in search of game time. “While I was at Harare City, I was selected to play at the 2016 AUSC Region Five Games and we were successful because we won the gold medal, then the following year that’s when I was signed for three years by the former national team head coach Sunday Chidzambga at ZPC Kariba. Now I am not attached to any team. I didn’t renew at ZPC. They are some teams not in this country promising to sign me when their window period is open.” Nyamuziwa together with Issa Ali under the Caps United youngsters made the final 18-member squad of the Young Warriors. In 2018, he made headlines after his brace helped the Young Warriors garner six points and maintain their winning run at the Cosafa tournament in Zambia after they thrashed Lesotho 4-0.