It’s been ages since Cryptocurrency entered our lives. With time the values fluctuated giving new dimensions to the people. The most commonly used cryptocurrency called the Bitcoin has been people’s attention with time. Earlier the Cryptocurrency was seen in Twitter or private chats but things have changed during this pandemic when people increased their Tiktok usage. 2020 became the year where people including teens to nonagenarians became aware of the Cryptocurrencies. I would tell you how. Inconstancy in Dollar: The US Dollar has always been going through fluctuations. But 2020 is marked by the Corona Virus pandemic that ultimately increased the value. Businesses, events and many other plans were halted but what remained same was the internet and these Digital Cryptocurrencies. The Fighting Mobile Monopoly in Zimbabwe: Recently, the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe has issued a notice. They informed people that all the financial service providers including the mobile money operators must switch to the national payment system called Zimswitch. This notice created many hurdles because Ecocash was the renowned mobile money operator but was targeted. Amidst of this the hyperinflation environment these hurdles are creating tensions. All people in Zimbabwe found another good alternative and that is Bitcoin. They find it easier to transfer money across the borders through the bitcoins. Cryptocurrencies Being Fluently Accessible: Crypto that was earlier referred to the gamers, coders or the millionaires has become beyond it. It has become the place where people globally have the opportunity to participate and have control over their wealth. Cryptocurrencies are accessible through your smart phones. They take you out of that stress bubble where you have to wait for banks and their formalities. You have a smart phone so wherever you go you have your money with you! Recently during Corona Pandemic people used crypto on their smart phones to remain safe. Without any hassles of travelling you can transfer your amounts or invest money in any corner. Hype of Cryptocurrencies in Social Media: You can easily get insights about this trade through many social media apps and websites. Internet is full of options that include many trading robots too. They provide you with all the options for investing your money and guarantee a good gain as well. The media channels provide you with maximum awareness and great analysis. The analysis given by media channels are worth it because they call upon great analysts. The advertisements give people an idea of the Bitcoin rate. Crypto related chat groups have been made that continuously update people about the fluctuations. They provide unique proposals so that maximum people choice for the Cryptocurrency Trading. The poor economic condition in 2020 has made Bitcoin investment a hope in darkness for them. The Growing Use of Bitcoin: People prefer storing their funds in the form of Bitcoin. This give them absolute control over their wealth. Bitcoin give you a privacy as no information is leaked and shared with the banks. Bitcoin has grown so much that no government can suspend it like they issued notice against Ecocash. Bitcoin is immune to all the local inflations. According to Steve Hanke who is an economics professor at john Hopkins the local inflation exceeds 1000 percent per annum. Foreign nationals are also using it to send any funds to their home countries. People affected through the pandemic lost the pace in their businesses. Many of them found themselves in huge void but Bitcoin gave them a hope. They got awareness through the internet because of the cryptocurrencies being famous. The internet full of trading robots helped everyone to choose wisely. People became mindful of it and installed apps like the bitcoin bank app that gave them guaranteed results. Joining this Crypto community gave huge benefits. Traders are tapping into the growing demand for bitcoin. Which app do you prefer to invest in Crypto World?