BY FORTUNE MBELE ZESCO midfielder  Thabani Kamusoko is excited at the prospect of a return to action in the Zambian Premier League and hopes for a quick return to the Warriors fold. The Warriors have a series of Africa Cup of Nations (Afcon) and World Cup qualifier matches coming up starting with back-to-back Afcon Group H ties against Algeria next month. The World Cup qualifiers will be played next year and following his last dance with the Warriors which came when they beat Somalia 3-2 on goal aggregate in the preliminary, Kamusoko is hoping he can earn a call-up. Kamusoko has been out of action since he suffered an ankle injury in December last year at a Zesco United training session. After the 2019/2020 season was suspended in March, it resumed in July only to be shut down prematurely after three weeks following a spike in COVID-19 cases. The start of the 2020/2021 brings with it reprieve for Kamusoko, who has fully recovered as Zesco will be away to Napsa Stars in their first game at the weekend. “It feels good to start the season and we have prepared well. I am looking forward to another chance with the Warriors and I am ready for the national team since I’m working hard on my fitness. It will take a lot of hard work for me to return to the national team as I have been out of action due to the injury which was a major setback for me. I am happy though that I am back and running again. I’m working on my fitness and other things,” Kamusoko
said. He is hoping to get some game time to prove that he still has got the touch. “I have not played a competitive game since I got injured. I got injured at training in December as we were preparing to play TP Mazembe (Democratic Republic of Congo) in the Caf Champions League group stages. I did not play in the three games in July when the league resumed and then it was ended. I’m hoping to get some game time this season since I have recovered,” Kamusoko said. After he failed to secure some Europe-based and South Africa-based players for the Malawi friendly tie earlier in the month, Warriors’ coach Zdravko Logarusic assembled a makeshift squad that had five players plying their trade in Zambia. The squad had Kamusoko’s teammate at Zesco Tafadzwa Rusike, Jimmy Dzingai (Nkana), Takudzwa Chimwemwe  (Buildcon), Tanaka Chinyahara (Red Arrows) and Evans Katema of Zanaco.