SINCE the fall of humanity in the garden of Eden, God instituted means to mend the broken down relationship between Himself and the human race. Devotion column:Erasmus Makarimayi The rift couldn’t be removed by good works by the human race. No righteousness by self effort, merit, earning, deserving or attaining it could reconcile the fallen world back to God. Religions came up to reach to God, but God’s plan was through Himself in His Son Jesus Christ. Christianity is God reaching to us as opposed to religion which is a futile human attempt to curry favour with God.
God isn’t reactionary in His salvation plan. He’s proactive since He was there before time or before the beginning. God the Creator wasn’t caught by surprise. He wasn’t caught off guard by human unbelief. Revelation 13:8 points, “And all that dwell upon the earth shall worship him, whose names are not written in the book of life of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world.” The phrase, slain from the foundation of the world speaks to the eternal redemption plan. At the appointed time, God rolled out His preplanned solution.
Galatians 4:4-5 tell us, “[4] But when the fullness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the law, [5] To redeem them that were under the law, that we might receive the adoption of sons.” Believers are sons and daughters. Salvation by grace through faith rescued us from the law which couldn’t draw us closer to God or rather bring us to union and fellowship with God.
The Bible tells us of the work of God in Christ to reconcile us back. This is the finished or accomplished work of God devoid of human effort or input. 2 Corinthians 5:19, Amplified records, “It was God [personally present] in Christ, reconciling and restoring the world to favor with Himself, not counting up and holding against [men] their trespasses [but cancelling them], and committing to us the message of reconciliation (of the restoration to favour).” It’s God’s own initiative. None of us contributed to God’s plan of salvation. Ephesians 2:8-9 tells us, “[8] For by grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of yourselves: it is the gift of God: [9] Not of works, lest any man should boast.” All we can say is thank you Aba Father. Paul Preaches in Acts 13:38-39, “[38] Be it known unto you therefore, men and brethren, that through this man is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins: [39] And by him all that believe are justified from all things, from which ye could not be justified by the law of Moses.” The Mosaic law couldn’t and cannot bring us into right relationship with God. The law was nailed to the cross to allow us salvation by Grace. Colossians 2:14, Amplified, reads, “Having cancelled and blotted out and wiped away the handwriting of the note (bond) with its legal decrees and demands which was in force and stood against us (hostile to us). This  The law couldn’t and can’t reconcile us to God. Hebrews 10:1-4, Ample show us, “[1] For since the Law has merely a rude outline (foreshadowing) of the good things to come — instead of fully expressing those things — it can never by offering the same sacrifices continually year after year make perfect those who approach [its altars]. [2] For if it were otherwise, would [these sacrifices] not have stopped being offered? Since the worshipers had once for all been cleansed, they would no longer have any guilt or consciousness of sin. [3] But in those sacrifices there is a reminder of sins every year. [4] Because the blood of bulls and goats is powerless to take sins
away.” You’re of Christ and not of Moses. Now unto him that is able to keep you from falling, and to present you faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy, To the only wise God our Saviour, be glory and majesty, dominion and power, both now and ever. Amen. Grace and peace be multiplied to you through knowledge.