BY SHARON SIBINDI THE events management industry is set for a revolution as more young women venture into it with fresh and innovative ideas, a young businesswoman in Bulawayo has said. Primrose Nyevhe, the owner of Jayrose Botique, said she was overjoyed to see other young women entering the business world, bringing with them diverse ideas. “As a young woman, I am happy and overjoyed to see other young women venture into business,” she said. “One thing for sure is that, participating in business will guarantee you financial independence, which is important.” Nyevhe was the guest of honour at a hybrid launch of Natasha Vimbai Kafata’s Tasha-li Events company in Bulawayo early this week. Due to COVID-19 fears, a small crowd attended the launch, while Insta live demonstrations were broadcast for people in the diaspora. Nyevhe said, with the emergence of new innovative companies like Tasha-li, she expected disruption and changes in the events management sector. “The events management industry is on the edge of a huge disruption,” she said. “It is going to evolve because young people, especially young women, are emerging with beautiful ideas.” Natasha (25) said although her company hoped to merge events management with tourism, as a start they were involved in all forms of events planning. “Tasha-li Events is an events company that provides event styling and decor services,” she said. “We do all types of events, picnics, birthday parties, graduation parties, baby showers, bridal showers and weddings.” Natasha said business was looking good as the world approached Christmas. “We started last year November and had five well-organised events before COVID-19 and lockdown happened,” she said. “Now that many lockdown restrictions have been lifted, many more people have booked with us and we are really looking forward to all events.” The event attracted young up-and-coming businesswomen that include Primrose Nyevhe, the owner of Jayrose Botique. Natasha said she was inspired to start the company by her in-born passion to organise events. “The company was inspired by my love to plan or organise events. I enjoy developing concepts and making people happy,” she said.