BY DESMOND CHINGARANDE WAVERLEY Blankets managing director Aron Vico has withdrawn his challenge at the High Court where he had requested that the Zimbabwe Anti-Corruption Commission (Zacc) fraudulently acquired rights to search and seize his company documents. Vico was challenging warrants of seizure and search against many companies owned by the late businessman Victor Cohen initiated by his daughters, Debra Vico nee Cohen, Amanda Berkowitz nee Cohen and Belynda Halfon nee Cohen. It is alleged that some of the company’s documents were fraudulently manufactured to grab the shareholding from the late businessman’s children — Berkowitz and Halfonn who have been deprived of their shareholding. The daughters have been at loggerheads with Vico after he allegedly manufactured fake company documents with the help of corrupt company consultants and staff members to change ownership of the Cohen’s business empire. Vico, however, dropped the challenge and provided Zacc with the documents of seven companies at the centre of the argument, which include Waverley Blankets, Centracom, Gillimard Fashions, Tanrest and Blankets for Africa, Colourfast Textiles and Waverley Plastics. Vico and his lawyer Herbert Mutasa of GGG had questioned the mind-set of the magistrate who issued the warrant, saying that the magistrate in question might not have applied her mind to the issue. But Zacc warned Vico in its affidavit, saying the challenge to their warrants of seizure and search proved that Vico had skeletons in the closet that needed “exorcism”. “Zacc has a constitutional duty to prevent, detect and investigate crime. It is merely carrying out its duties within the confines of the law and with due respect to human rights. The warrant in question was granted procedurally by a magistrate from information on oath based on reasonable ground,” Zacc acting secretary Charity Matumbi said. “In the given circumstances, there is no doubt that the applicant has no cause of action and has a skeleton to hide in his cupboard which needs exorcism and this could be the very reason why he is rushing for a cover from this honourable court,” she said. Berkowitz and Halfon had also filed an application for joinder saying court proceedings should include both companies. The sisters said they had been requesting company’s information since they were shareholders but the company secretary had been refusing to release such. “There have been material changes to make to these entities, without my knowledge as a director or shareholder, including but not limited to diffusion of the share of allotments, bringing in of new players and restructuring of the directorship of these entities,” Berkowitz submitted.