Cryptocurrency has buzzed the world. Today hype is all about the cryptocurrency. Daily large number of people are entering into the crypto world. People use cryptocurrencies for financial transactions, online shopping, and trading, investing and exchanging money. PayPal is basically an American company that operates a worldwide online payments system. It is an electronic alternative to all the old payment methods. The best part is the easy to use method in PayPal that is helping millions globally. 2019 marked the steady rise of bitcoin but it crashed again to $ 7000. In 2020 the bitcoin rose up to $10,000 and fluctuated as low as $5000. But 2020 was the massive year with COVID pandemic and created voids for many. Many left many entered the crypto world and so the price varied. Bitcoin has taken up the hype these days. Since September, the price of bitcoin has risen up to $12000. It is good news for the bitcoin users. Now many amounts of profit await them!  Acceptance by PayPal. PayPal has accepted cryptocurrency as a means to do all the financial transactions. The company said that the PayPal users can even buy things through these virtual coins. The bitcoins can also be stored in the digital wallets of PayPal. Moreover, PayPal would make more buying options to aid people further. The Meteoric rise of Cryptocurrencies. Over the years bitcoin rose and benefited economy but with the COVID pandemic things came to a rest. Many projects and global stocks came to a meltdown and due to which people had to suffer. This was not the case with bitcoin alone rather all other businesses and everything got affected. With the rapid change in prices cryptocurrencies have become popular among the investors. The great businessman now relies on bitcoins too. Bitcoin is the most famous cryptocurrency among the other ones. Bitcoin has propelled the international trade as well. The people no longer need a bank to trade internationally. They can sell products in exchange for bitcoins and earn a handsome income. Such opportunities dwell more expanded economy of the country. PayPal said that they are aiming to increase the consumer understanding and adoption of cryptocurrency. As they offered this, they also said that they would be giving educational contents to the account holders so that things become easy for them. However other than PayPal people can do easy bitcoin trade and get educational contents from bitcoin revolution app. Such apps can help you even if you don’t have a bitcoin background. They make trading and investing much easier. Payment with PayPal. PayPal is the largest merchant network globally. It has allowed the cryptocurrencies and has become an intermediary for the transfers across the borders. PayPal will get virtual coins that will be converted into the relevant currency to the receiver. The receiver will get the amount in his required national currency rather than in bitcoins. Moreover, many trading of bitcoin occurs through the private chat groups including Telegram, WhatsApp and so on. These platforms are not that safe. Many people avoid these because large business transactions cannot be carried through such informal channels. There are many vendors for a single transaction in such informal channels. So, you should only prefer those channels that are renowned. PayPal is a famous and well-established channel and you should prefer it for your transactions. Finally, there are many newbies that do not know how to buy or sell. Even some fail to buy the basic assets effectively. As a result, they get victims of the scams and fail. Such people give a culture of disinterest to the others making them less motivated. So, people should know the reliable channels and should start from them.